C OMMUNICATIONS

CO M M U N I C AT I O N S

12

P

ilots need a radio licence to use the airwaves,
which lasts for life and requires no revalidation.
Although your use of the airwaves is limited, you
must still know the rules so that other people don't suffer.
In Aviation, using non-standard phraseology can be fatal.
The phrase:

© Phil Croucher Electrocution Technical Publishers 2021

“Advise ready for taxi, use caution, company pushing
out”
is not a clearance to pushback, even though it might sound
like one. Similarly, an instruction to conduct runup checks
on the other side of a runway you would have to cross to
get there is not a clearance to do so.

matters is highly unprofessional. This is because anyone
with an emergency can't send a MAYDAY until you have
stopped talking. The only time you can interfere with
another station is when you have to send a higher priority
message (see Categories Of Messages, below). It is also
an offence to use a callsign for a purpose other than that
for which it is notified.
Within about 200 nm of an ATC station (depending on
your height), VHF (AM) is normally used - over a 1 hour
flight, it is easily possible to use over 10 frequencies.
One of the main reasons for RTF congestion is having to
send extra messages because people don’t use the radio
properly, which includes using concise and unambiguous
phraseology. Controllers are also not supposed to transmit
during takeoff, or on the last part of final approach or the
landing roll, unless safety is a factor (you are working
hardest at these times and don’t need distractions).

As further examples: The words “request Federal Aid” in
one message were interpreted to mean that a hijack was in
process, rather than the intended request for FAA
clearance expressed in a joking fashion. The figures 210
by themselves could mean a Flight Level, a heading, or a
speed to be maintained.
Communications should be restricted to what is required
for the task in hand. Obscene language is prohibited, and
using the air-to-air frequency to talk about personal
EASA Private Pilot Studies

12-1

Purchased by Andrew Done, andrewdone@fastmail.com #20310022


12

CO M M U N I C AT I O N S

These points should be borne in mind:
• Always use standard phraseology
• Maintain radio discipline by not using the system
unnecessarily and by using unambiguous language
• Monitor the frequencies being used
• Pass all information relevant to the phase of flight
• Wait and listen before transmitting on a new
frequency
• If it’s been quiet for a while, check the frequency
• Set the clearance given, not the one expected
• Note down any clearances
© Phil Croucher Electrocution Technical Publishers 2021

• Check if you are unsure!
You are bound to preserve the secrecy of communications.
That is, you may not say anything about, or even the
existence of, any transmissions received, transmitted or
intercepted by a radio station, except to whoever is
supposed to receive it in the first place, or a properly
appointed official, which may be someone who operates a
retransmission service (this does not apply to distress
messages, or those relating to safety, such as severe
weather, or addressed to All Stations). Messages should be
as brief as possible, consistent with getting the point
across. Thinking about what you are going to say before
you speak will help with this - if it is a long message (say

filing a flight plan), write it down first, and break
frequently, in case anyone is trying to get an emergency
message out.
Naturally, a continuous listening watch should be
maintained at all times, for airmanship, but especially
when transiting controlled airspace during notified hours
of watch. You must report your position and height on
entering and just before leaving an ATZ.
Due to licence restrictions, aircraft equipment is meant to
have as little power (around 250 watts) and as few
controls as possible, including displays, so some
frequencies may not be completely shown - 122.075, for
example, comes up as 122.07 (usually, you will pull one
of the knobs to get the extra bit). In fact, everything
should be preset.
The standard channel spacing is 25 kHz, so a 760-channel
transceiver is necessary (if the last digit displayed
includes 2 or 7, your equipment is capable of 25 kHz
operations). In some areas of Europe, channel spacing has
been reduced to 8.33 kHz, especially in upper airspace
(above FL 245). This is an awkward channel spacing, so
the frequencies don’t fall into convenient round numbers,
so they are referred to by a kind of shorthand.
Under CAP 413, all six figures shall be used when
identifying frequencies irrespective of whether they are 25
kHz or 8.33 kHz spaced. Exceptionally, when the final
two digits of the frequency are both zero, only the first

EASA Private Pilot Studies

12-2

Purchased by Andrew Done, andrewdone@fastmail.com #20310022


12

CO M M U N I C AT I O N S

four digits need be given. Technically, an 8.33 kHz
frequency is a “channel”, but the word “channel” is not
used in RTF:
• To indicate 8.33 kHz capability: AFFIRM EIGHT
POINT THREE THREE

© Phil Croucher Electrocution Technical Publishers 2021

• To indicate lack of 8.33 kHz capability: NEGATIVE
EIGHT POINT THREE THREE

so your message can get through in full, that is, not
clipping the first bit. Secondly, whenever you get a
frequency change en route, not only should you write it
down on your Nav Log (because of short term memory
limitations), but change to the new frequency on the other
box, so you alternate between radios. This way, you have
something to go back to if you can't get through on the
new one.

Decimal is used when reading back a frequency,
whereas point is used when describing a
frequency spacing such as eight point three three.

Primary reference documents for this subject are ICAO
Docs 4444 (Air Traffic Management), Doc 9432, and
Annex 10.

The primary medium for aeronautical communications is
VHF (AM) in the frequency range between 118 - 136.975
MHz. Its official classification is A3E.

English must be used for air–ground communications
unless an alternative has been arranged with ATC.

The Squelch quietens down the output when no signal is
being received, so you don't get continuous earfuls of
white noise. A signal coming in cancels this and activates
the audio (a variable squelch merely determines the signal
level when this occurs). The correct procedure with the
Squelch, therefore, is to rotate the knob until the hiss just
stops, and leave it there, although it is true to say that this
will also hide a weak signal, so lifting the squelch may
help you hear it, if you are far away.
There are one or two points about radios that aren't often
taught properly during training. The first is to wait a split
second to speak after pressing the transmit button, which
gives all the relays in the system a chance to switch over
EASA Private Pilot Studies

12-3

Purchased by Andrew Done, andrewdone@fastmail.com #20310022


12

CO M M U N I C AT I O N S

Q Codes

Q CODES
These are a hangover from the old wireless telegraphy
days when Morse Code was used (1 July 1913), for
international communication between ships at sea and
coastal stations. They are not officially supposed to be
used for voice transmissions, but they are:

© Phil Croucher Electrocution Technical Publishers 2021

• QFE is used near an airfield, particularly in the
circuit, and is the pressure read directly from the
altimeter when on the ground at an airfield
• QNH is used for general transit elsewhere, below
the transition altitude. It is the QFE converted to a
pressure that would theoretically exist at sea level at
that point - this is done because reporting stations
are not all at the same level. You add the pressure
change for elevation above sea level on a standard
day. The QFE is reduced to MSL using ISA
temperatures and lapse rates. It is forecast for one or
two hours ahead over large areas
• QNE is the "standard" setting of 1013.2 hPa (or
29.92") for Flight Levels above transition altitude.
Flight Levels are surfaces of constant atmospheric
pressure related to a datum of 1013.2 hPa

QNH at sea level, regardless of temperature. When
above MSL and warmer than ISA, it will be less
than QNH, and more when the temperature is colder
than ISA (the opposite below MSL)
• QDM - magnetic bearing to
• QDR - magnetic bearing from
• QUJ - true bearing to
• QTE - true bearing from
To request a True Bearing, the correct phraseology is:
True Bearing, True Bearing, Callsign, Request True
Bearing, Callsign

Accuracy Of Bearings
Class

Bearing

Position

A

œ2¬

5 nm

B

œ5¬

20 nm

C

œ10¬

50 nm

D

>10¬

>50 nm

Trivia: Q codes reserved for aviation use are QAA–QNZ.

• QFF is the QFE reduced to MSL using the actual
temperature at the surface (between there and sea
level it is assumed to be constant). QFF allows
accurate surface charts to be drawn. It is equal to
EASA Private Pilot Studies

12-4

Purchased by Andrew Done, andrewdone@fastmail.com #20310022


12

CO M M U N I C AT I O N S

Categories Of Message

CATEGORIES OF MESSAGE
Messages must be dealt with in this order:
• Distress
• Urgency
• Direction Finding
• Flight Safety (ATC messages, avoiding weather)
• Meteorological
• Flight Regularity (parts and materials)
• UN Charter
• Government messages
© Phil Croucher Electrocution Technical Publishers 2021

• Service communications
• All others

EASA Private Pilot Studies

12-5

Purchased by Andrew Done, andrewdone@fastmail.com #20310022


12

CO M M U N I C AT I O N S

Operating Procedures

OPERATING PROCEDURES
A message consists of four parts: The Callup, The Reply,
The Message and The Acknowledgment.
An inexperienced pilot may use Tyro with a
military controller, who will then speak slowly
and carefully in words of one syllable.

• Altitude 800 (Eight Hundred)

Phonetic Alphabet

• 1,500 (One Thousand Five Hundred)*
• 6,715 (Six Seven One Five)

NUMBERS

© Phil Croucher Electrocution Technical Publishers 2021

where they occur as round figures. 65 is therefore six-five,
while 2000 is two thousand. Eleven thousand is One One
Thousand. In other words, combinations of thousands and
whole hundreds must be transmitted by pronouncing each
digit in the number of thousands, followed by the word
Thousand, followed by the number of hundreds, followed
by the word Hundred. For example:

Number

Speech

0

ZERO

1

WUN

2

TOO

3

TREE

4

FOWER

5

FIFE

6

SICKS

7

SEVEN

8

AIT

9

NINER

• 12,000 (One Two Thousand)
*The reason you might
say Two Thousand Four
Hundred rather than Two
Four Zero Zero is that it
can be construed as To
Four Zero Zero, as in
Cleared To Four Zero Zero

Numbers (as used for altitude, cloud height, visibility and
RVR information) should generally be spoken
individually, except for whole thousands (or hundreds)

• 200 (Two Hundred)
Use the word decimal (daysimal) for a decimal point - one
one six decimal two means 116.2 (the word decimal is an
ICAO word, replaced with point in the USA).
Altitude above sea level is expressed in thousands of feet,
plus hundreds, so 2500 is two thousand five hundred, but
FL 100 is flight level one zero zero* (ICAO), and QNH
1000 is one zero zero zero**. You would express headings
separately, e.g. two five zero for 250°.
*The ICAO standard is not used in UK. Instead, Flight
Levels are expressed in hundreds, as in one hundred, two
hundred, etc., as an effort against level busts. Flight levels
below FL 100 use two-digit numbers, e.g. Flight Level

EASA Private Pilot Studies

12-6

Purchased by Andrew Done, andrewdone@fastmail.com #20310022


12

CO M M U N I C AT I O N S

Operating Procedures

Eight Zero, to reduce the risk of confusion with a heading
instruction, which might be Zero Eight Zero.
**From CAP 413:
2.13 When transmitting messages containing aircraft
callsigns, altimeter settings, flight levels (with the
exception of FL100, 200, 300 etc.which are expressed
as Flight Level (number) HUNDRED), headings, wind
speeds/directions, pressure settings, airspeed,
transponder codes and frequencies, each digit shall be
transmitted separately.

LETTERS

To make transmissions clearer, letters are pronounced in
certain ways, as shown in the table below. Speak all words
plainly and clearly, with none of them running together
and no accentuation. Do not shout, or speak too quickly.
Although the phraseology can be a bit longwinded (daysi-mal for decimal, for example), and you may feel a bit
stupid pronouncing some of the words, remember they are
that way to reduce ambiguity, which would have been
handy in Tenerife when two 747s collided with each other
because the clearances got confused (see Human Factors).

© Phil Croucher Electrocution Technical Publishers 2021

Also from CAP 413:
All numbers used in the transmission of altitude,
height, cloud height, visibility and runway visual range
information which contain whole hundreds and whole
thousands shall be transmitted by pronouncing each
digit in the number of hundreds or thousands followed
by the word HUNDRED or TOUSAND as appropriate.
In UK, the word To is not used with flight levels:
Climb Flight Level 100
although the ICAO standard is to use it. This is to prevent
it being mistaken for the number two. However, To is used
with climb and descent instructions relating to heights or
altitudes, followed by the relevant word.

Letter

Word

Speech

Morse

A

Alpha

ALFAH

A

B

Bravo

BRAHVOH

B

C

Charlie

CHARLEE

C

D

Delta

DELLTAH

D

E

Echo

ECKOH

E

F

Foxtrot

FOCKSTROT

F

G

Golf

GOLF

G

H

Hotel

HOTELL

H

I

India

INDEAH

I

J

Juliet

JEWLEEETT

J

K

Kilo

KEYLOH

K

L

Lima

LEEMAH

L

M

Mike

MIKE

M

EASA Private Pilot Studies

12-7

Purchased by Andrew Done, andrewdone@fastmail.com #20310022


© Phil Croucher Electrocution Technical Publishers 2021

12

CO M M U N I C AT I O N S

Operating Procedures

Letter

Word

Speech

Morse

N

November

NOVEMBER

N

O

Oscar

OSSCAH

O

P

Papa

PAHPAH

P

Q

Quebec

KEHBECK

Q

R

Romeo

ROWMEOH

R

S

Sierra

SEEAIRRAH

S

T

Tango

TANGGO

T

U

Uniform

YOUNEEFORM

U

V

Victor

VIKTAH

V

W

Whiskey

WISSKEY

W

X

X-ray

ECKSRAY

X

Y

Yankee

YANGKEY

Y

Z

Zulu

ZOOLOO

Z

Transmis sion Te chnique
Assuming you are within the performance range of your
equipment, and after listening out first, to make sure you
don't interfere with another transmission, call ATC, using
their name, and normal conversational tones (no need to
shout!), followed by their function, as in London Tower.
Then use the words This Is, followed by your own
identifier (you should use the full callsign on initial
contact with ATC, but you can subsequently use any
abbreviations they make. See Callsigns, below).

Normally, your callsign is the same as your aircraft's
markings, unless you have applied to ICAO for
permission to use a company name or a flight number.
Include the frequency you are on, in case they are
listening to several, so they know which button to push,
then the word Over, as an invitation for them to respond:
"London Approach, this is Golf Papa Alpha Charlie
Oscar on one one eight decimal two, over."
You should maintain an even rate of speech, not above
100 words per minute, with a constant volume, avoiding
hesitation. ATC will reply with your full callsign, but may
well shorten it afterwards, to the country letter followed
by the last two of your registration, as in Golf-Charlie
Oscar, if there will be no confusion with another aircraft.
You can use it from then on. Don't be concerned if there is
a short delay - the controller might be writing down your
details first, or may even have to put down the coffee (in
Canada, you may be on a remote link). If you receive no
reply, wait ten seconds before trying again.
If the field has an ATIS (continual weather broadcasts,
changed every half hour), obtain the information and
include the code letter with your initial call:
"with information Delta."
The format is the same if ATC call you first, but you can
omit the word over if the reply is obvious and there will be
no misunderstanding.

EASA Private Pilot Studies

12-8

Purchased by Andrew Done, andrewdone@fastmail.com #20310022


12

CO M M U N I C AT I O N S

Operating Procedures

FREQUENCIES

Phrase

Meaning

Break

Separation between parts of a message

Break Break

Separation between parts of messages when
busy

Cancel

Annul previously transmitted message

However, in airspace where channels are separated by 25
KHz, and there is no operational requirement to use 6
figures, you can use the first five, except where the last 2
are zero, when you can use the first four.

Changing to

Going to another frequency

Check

Examine a system

Cleared

Proceed under the conditions specified

Confirm

Did I get that right?

Standard Words & Phrases

Contact

Get in touch with....

To make a correction, say the word "Correction" followed
by the last correct word or phrase before continuing. To
get something repeated, use the words say again. You can
specify parts of a message by saying say again all after….

Correct

That is correct

Correction

Oops - made a mistake

Disregard

Ignore my last

Go Ahead*

Proceed with message

How Do You
Read?

What is my readability?

I say again

I repeat

Monitor

Listen out on (frequency)

Negative

No, or not correct

Out

This conversation is over - no reply is expected

The way to transmit and read back a frequency is to use all
six figures, except when the last two figures are zero,
when you can use four. For example, 120.375 MHz is:

© Phil Croucher Electrocution Technical Publishers 2021

One Two Zero Decimal Three Seven Five

A message from ATC to all stations listening out on a
frequency would be a general call, and be preceded with
the words All Stations. A message to multiple stations can
be done in any convenient sequence, but the replies must
be in the order given. Confirm Squawk means “What code
is set on your transponder?”
Phrase

Meaning

Acknowledge

Confirm you received this message

Over

I have finished speaking and expect a
response

Affirm

Agreement

Read Back

Repeat the message back exactly as received

Approved

Permission granted for proposed action

Recleared

Ignore your last clearance,receive a new one

EASA Private Pilot Studies

12-9

Purchased by Andrew Done, andrewdone@fastmail.com #20310022


© Phil Croucher Electrocution Technical Publishers 2021

12

CO M M U N I C AT I O N S

Operating Procedures

Phrase

Meaning

Report

Pass the following information (e.g. Report
altitude).

second two the minutes past the hour, so 2345 means 45
minutes past eleven in the evening (take away 12), or a
quarter to midnight.

Request

I would like......

If you see a timegroup:

Roger

The last messages has been received (if not
understood!)

Say again

Repeat what you just said

Speak Slower

Reduce your rate of speech

Standby

Wait to be called (and do not assume a
clearance)

Verify

Check and confirm

Wilco

Your instructions will be complied with (Will
Comply)

Words Twice

Send (or will send) every word twice

220345Z
It means a quarter to four GMT on the 22nd of the month.
Usually, you only transmit the numbers for minutes
("arriving at 45"), but this only relates to the current hour,
and if there will be no misunderstanding. If there is any
possibility of confusion, or you mean another hour,
include the other figures. Time is normally given to the
nearest minute, except that control towers may state the
time to the nearest half minute when issuing a taxi
clearance to a departing aircraft.

*In the UK, the term Pass Your Message is used instead.

You can Request a Time Check from ATC at any time.

The correct phrase to use when abandoning a takeoff is
Stopping, and Runway Vacated when clear.

Callsigns

Ti me
Time is expressed in terms of the 24-hour clock, based on
UTC (Universal Co-ordinated Time), or what used to be
called Greenwich Mean Time. The letter Z (for Zulu,
meaning GMT - sorry, UTC) is used as shorthand in
things like flight plans, etc. The first two figures of a 24hour time represent the hour past midnight, and the

You should use your full callsign until it is abbreviated by
ATC, then you can use the shortened version. For
example, XY-ABC can become X-BC or X-ABC.
Helicopter G-YABC would become Helicopter BC. A6GLC becomes A-LC. Norjet 123 cannot be abbreviated
(in general, you can shorten callsigns that contain
registration marks). Once satisfactory communication has
been established, and there will be no confusion, you are
allowed to abbreviate a ground station’s callsign.

EASA Private Pilot Studies

12-10

Purchased by Andrew Done, andrewdone@fastmail.com #20310022


12

CO M M U N I C AT I O N S

Operating Procedures

The abbreviation of callsign XY-ABC to Y-BC is
not an ICAO Standard. The relevant Standard is
ICAO Annex 10, Vol. II, Para. 5.2.1.7.2.2
Abbreviated Call Signs (as of 6th Edition, Oct. 2001).

The use of the calling aeronautical station’s callsign
followed by the answering aeronautical station’s callsign
shall be considered the invitation to proceed with
transmission by the station calling. The phrase Pass Your
Message may be used when considered to be appropriate.

AERONAUTICAL STATIONS

© Phil Croucher Electrocution Technical Publishers 2021

ATS units are identified by the name of the location, then
the service available:

Posit ion Reports
This is the order of items in a position report:

Service

Suffix

• Callsign

Area Control

CONTROL

• Position

Radar (General)

RADAR

• Time at position

Approach Control

APPROACH

• Level or altitude

Aerodrome Control

TOWER

Approach Control
Arrival/Departure

DIRECTOR/DEPARTURE
(RADAR when combined)

Ground Movement
Control

GROUND

Tal king to Air Traffic Control

MATZ Crossing

ZONE

PAR

TALKDOWN

Flight Information

INFORMATION

Air/Ground
Communication
Service

RADIO

Clearance Delivery

DELIVERY

You should comply with ATC instructions as soon as they
are issued, but sometimes a climb or descent is left to your
discretion, in which case the words When Ready will be
used. You should report leaving your present level once
you have departed from it and are maintaining a positive
rate of climb or descent, because another aircraft above
you may be given descent straight away. Control is based
on known traffic only, so you are still responsible for safe
procedures and good judgment - clearances are not an

• Next position
• ETA at next position

EASA Private Pilot Studies

12-11

Purchased by Andrew Done, andrewdone@fastmail.com #20310022


12

CO M M U N I C AT I O N S

Operating Procedures

authority to violate the rules! Information about flight
conditions is meant as assistance or reminders.
There are three main categories of aeronautical
communications service:
• Air Traffic Control Service (ATC) which can only
be provided by licensed Air Traffic Control Officers
(ATCOs) who are closely regulated by the Authority

© Phil Croucher Electrocution Technical Publishers 2021

• Flight Information Service at aerodromes can be
provided only by licensed Flight Information
Service Officers (FISOs), who are also regulated by
the Authority
• Aerodrome Air/Ground Communication Service
(AGCS) which can be provided by Radio Operators
who are not licensed, but who have a certificate of
competency to operate radio equipment on aviation
frequencies from the Authority. These operations
come under the jurisdiction of the radio licence
holder, but are not otherwise regulated.
Other categories of aeronautical communications service
include VOLMET, SIGMET, Automatic Terminal
Information Service (ATIS) or Aeronautical Information
Services (AIS).

• Obtain the ATIS or current weather
• Request startup clearance, stating the ATIS version
you have, but....
• Obtain taxi instructions (up to a limiting point normally the holding point of the runway in use).
Doing this while taxying is difficult in the hover, so
maybe get it beforehand.
• Change to Tower for takeoff clearance, also difficult
in the hover, so you will often taxi on the Tower
frequency.
On the way back in:
• Obtain the ATIS or current weather.
• Request joining instructions, stating the ATIS
version you have.
• Report position in the circuit, such as downwind,
finals, etc (the finals call is made within 7 km. Long
finals is at 15 km).
• If ATC require you to Go Around, they will say so,
at which point you climb away and start the circuit
again. You can initiate a Go Around at any time by
saying Going Around.

On a typical flight, you might talk to several ATC
departments, loosely in the following order (some may be
combined at smaller airfields). In general, the procedure
for outbound aircraft is:
EASA Private Pilot Studies

12-12

Purchased by Andrew Done, andrewdone@fastmail.com #20310022


12

CO M M U N I C AT I O N S

Operating Procedures

RELAYING

TOWER

If asked by Approach to relay (for example) a change of
communications to Control on a particular frequency, the
transmission might be:

For traffic close to the aerodrome, including
the circuit. After takeoff, you may be asked to
change to Approach (below), but, more
typically, you will stay with the Tower until
clear of the area. Taxi instructions will
contain a clearance limit, meaning a point
beyond which you must not go without
further permission. This will normally be the holding
point of the runway in use (you are automatically cleared
across those on the way, holding short when you get
there), but may be elsewhere if they are busy. On a large
airfield, taxiways to be used will be included:

Norjet 83, relaying Approach for Shuttle 1 Tango,
contact Control 126.075.

© Phil Croucher Electrocution Technical Publishers 2021

GROUND CONTROL

The Ground Controller handles all movements on the
manoeuvring area, including aircraft and vehicles, and
possibly start clearances (departure clearances given by
Ground are not clearances to takeoff!) Typically, you
would be talking to Ground up to the holding point, and
afterwards when landing - this helps ATC with planning
and keeps the tower frequency clear (but a helicopter may
taxi on the Tower frequency, as your hands are full in the
hover). It also reduces fuel waste from delays.
It often helps if you say where you are, and include the
current ATIS:
"G-PACO on Helipad 1 with Bravo, request start"
Bravo is the latest ATIS. You will get an acknowledgment,
with the current QNH.

"Taxi to the hold for 19, via taxiway Alpha."
T HE C IRCUIT

In a standard overhead join at 2000 feet, you should call
“Deadside Descending” on the dead side. In the circuit, a
normal final approach is within 4 nm of the runway - long
finals is between 4 and 8 nm. You can also call Outer
Marker instead of Finals if there is one.
When landing, if told to continue, due to traffic on the
runway, that is not a clearance to land - you still need
permission. If the runway is long enough, in daylight, you
may be allowed to land after whatever is on it already.
The words go around mean initiate a missed approach.

EASA Private Pilot Studies

12-13

Purchased by Andrew Done, andrewdone@fastmail.com #20310022


12

CO M M U N I C AT I O N S

Operating Procedures

APPROACH

© Phil Croucher Electrocution Technical Publishers 2021

Sometimes known as Radar, these
controllers sit in a darkened room
in front of radar screens, so have
no visual contact with the traffic
they are dealing with (don't worry,
they are fed frequently).
Approach controllers guide the
aircraft during its approach or
departure to or from the airport. Mostly, arrivals and
departures are handled by a single approach unit but, at
busier airfields they may be separate, with different
controllers, callsigns and frequencies.
Under IFR in controlled airspace, you will be given
descent clearance to whatever limit is used by ACC before
handover to Approach. Outside controlled airspace, do not
enter until cleared to do so. The phrase Under RADAR
Control is only used when a radar control service is being
provided, meaning that you must do what you are told,
unless you are avoiding immediate danger. ATC assumes
responsibility for separation and terrain avoidance.
A Radar Advisory Service is only provided under IFR,
regardless of the weather. You will be given the bearing,
distance and height of known conflicting traffic, plus
advisory avoiding action, which should nevertheless not
be ignored. If you do, you must advise ATC. You remain
responsible for terrain avoidance.

You can get A Radar Information Service (RIS) under IFR
or VFR. You still get information on conflicting traffic,
but without avoiding action. You are responsible for
separation from other aircraft and terrain avoidance.
A Flight Information Service is not a radar service. It is
merely someone to talk to.
R ADAR I DENTIFICATION

You can be identified by information from yourself
(position reporting, or in relation to a prominent object),
by making turns that can be seen on radar, or by identing
with SSR. You should be advised if radar identification is
lost, or about to be lost, and appropriate instructions
should be given. The only form of identification that does
not require a backup (such as a turn) is squawking ident.
Heading information and instructions are in degrees
magnetic.
R ADAR V ECTORING

You may be given specific vectors for lateral separation
purposes, and left to resume your own navigation when it
is completed (they may be nice and tell you where you
are). Orbits (complete turns) may be used for delaying
purposes or for increasing separation.
AREA

Area controllers are not necessarily based at an airport,
and control aircraft that are passing through the airspace
without landing.

EASA Private Pilot Studies

12-14

Purchased by Andrew Done, andrewdone@fastmail.com #20310022


12

CO M M U N I C AT I O N S

Operating Procedures

Cl earance s and Re adbac ks

© Phil Croucher Electrocution Technical Publishers 2021

You should start a transmission with the callsign of the
service provider followed by the aircraft callsign. When a
readback of an ATC message is required, you should
terminate the read back transmission with the aircraft’s
radio callsign.
You must comply with any clearances received and
acknowledged. If you don't like them, you should say so at
the time, since an acknowledgment without further
comment is taken as such. Clearances are valid only in
controlled airspace, and there will be some form of the
word "clear" in the text to identify them. Clearances must
always be read back (although you don’t need to read
back the wind velocity). You must also comply with
instructions in the same way, unless safety is a factor. An
instruction will be identifiable, but the word "instruct"
may not be included. All clearances should be read back,
to ensure that they have been received and transmitted
properly in the first place, to the right aircraft.
If a clearance or an instruction is not suitable, you may
request and, if practicable, obtain an amended one. Use
the words Unable To Comply if you have a problem with a
clearance. Clearances are supposed to be passed slowly
and clearly, since you will need to write them down, and
preferably before startup, since you will not want to be
bothered while taxying, hovering or when lining up for
takeoff. They will contain the aircraft identification (as

per the flight plan), the clearance limit (usually the
destination) and the route, levels, changes and any other
instructions, especially about departure manoeuvres.
These clearances should be read back in full, in the order
given:
• Taxi instructions
• Clearances to enter, land on, take off from, cross,
backtrack and hold short of the runway in use
• Heading, speed and level instructions, including
Transition Levels
• Approach clearances
• Altimeter settings
• Transponder codes
• Airways or route clearances
• VDF information
• Frequency changes
• Type of radar service
Route clearances, such as the following, must be read
back completely.
G-PACO, after departure cleared to the zone boundary
via Route Echo. Climb to altitude 3000 feet, QNH
1009, squawk 6255

EASA Private Pilot Studies

12-15

Purchased by Andrew Done, andrewdone@fastmail.com #20310022


12

CO M M U N I C AT I O N S

Operating Procedures

Others (including conditional clearances) need only
contain key elements and include sufficient detail to
clearly indicate that they will be complied with.
The word Takeoff is only used by a pilot when
actually cleared for takeoff (in a separate
transmission), or the takeoff clearance is
cancelled - up until then, the word Departure is used.
Similarly, with regard to runway movements, the word
Cleared is only used in connection with a clearance to
takeoff and land. Otherwise, the words cross and
approved will be used.

© Phil Croucher Electrocution Technical Publishers 2021

CONDITIONAL CLEARANCES

A conditional clearance depends on the actions of another
aircraft, such as when being given clearance to cross a
runway after a taxying aircraft has passed. Correct
identification of the aircraft involved is essential.
Conditional clearances must be given in this order:
• Identification

This implies the need for you to identify the
aircraft or vehicle causing the conditional
clearance.
Readback must be in full and in the same sequence as
given, with the condition first.
*In the UK, the word After is used because the ICAO one,
Behind, has been misinterpreted.

Test Transmis sions
Radio transmissions for test purposes should be as short as
possible, and in any case not more than 10 seconds.
Repeat testing shall also be the minimum necessary.
The test must be identifiable as a test transmission and
must not be confused with other communications. To
achieve this, the following format is used:
• the callsign of the aeronautical station being called
• the aircraft identification
• the words RADIO CHECK

• The condition (specify)

• the frequency being used

• The subject of the condition
• The instruction
For example: "G-PACO - Behind* the A 340, Line up".
Your reply: "Behind the A 340, Line Up, G-PACO".

The operator of the aeronautical radio station being called
will assess the transmission and will advise the aircraft
making it in terms of the readability scale described
below, together with a comment on the nature of any
abnormalities noted, such as excessive noise, using the
following format:

EASA Private Pilot Studies

12-16

Purchased by Andrew Done, andrewdone@fastmail.com #20310022


12

CO M M U N I C AT I O N S

Operating Procedures

• the aircraft identification

Transfer Of Communication

• the callsign of the aeronautical station replying

When ATC want to hand you off to another ATS unit, they
will say something like:

• READABILITY x (where x is a number from the
table below)
• additional information with respect to abnormalities

Contact Ground (or whatever) on (frequency)
Contact London on 118.75

Sometimes it may be necessary for the operator of an
aeronautical station to reply with STATION CALLING
(frequency or 8.33 channel) UNREADABLE.

© Phil Croucher Electrocution Technical Publishers 2021

READABILITY SCALE

To check a radio, call up another station (if they're not
busy) and ask how they read you (don't take more than
about ten seconds). They will reply with a readability
grading on the following scale:
• 1 - unreadable
• 2 - readable now and then
• 3 - readable with difficulty
• 4 - readable
• 5 - perfectly readable
“Reading you Strength Three”, for example.

EASA Private Pilot Studies

12-17

Purchased by Andrew Done, andrewdone@fastmail.com #20310022


12

CO M M U N I C AT I O N S

Radio Failure

RADIO FAILURE

Squawk 7600 for communications failure. If you can hear
ATC they will likely ask you to push the ident button if
you cannot transmit.

ICAO Annex 10, Vol II.

© Phil Croucher Electrocution Technical Publishers 2021

Try another frequency, or talk to other aircraft first. You
will at least then know that your radio is OK. Make sure
also that the facility is not closed, that you are not out of
range, you have selected the right frequency, and that the
volume is set! In case the set is transmitting, you can
transmit your message twice, preceded by the words
Transmitting Blind.
If all that fails, essentially, you must comply with the last
clearance, which hopefully included permission to land,
or clear the area. If you don't need to enter controlled
airspace, carry on, maintaining VFR as necessary; don't
enter it even if you've been previously cleared. If you
must do so, divert and telephone for permission first. If
you're already in controlled airspace, where clearance has
been obtained to the boundary on leaving, or the field on
entering, proceed as planned. If in doubt, clear the zone
the most direct way as quickly as possible, avoiding
airfields, and making blind transmissions, in case the
transmitter is working. If you are in a circuit, and your
radio fails, repeatedly switch the landing lights on and off.

There is a system of flying a left or right-handed triangle
pattern that can be seen on radar, although it's usually only
used if you're lost as well as having a duff radio. If ATC
recognise your problem, they will send up a shepherd
aircraft to formate on you and bring you down, so remain
VMC if you can, and as high as possible so radar can see
you better. If you can squawk Mode C, do so, because that
will give a height readout to work with. If you can only
receive, fly in a right-handed pattern for a minute (over
300 knots, make it two). Fly at best endurance speed and
make each 120° turn as tight as possible. If you can't
transmit either, go to the left.

Receiver Failure
Make reports at scheduled times or positions (i.e. advise
the time of your next transmission), preceded by the
phrase “Transmitting Blind due to receiver failure”. Refer
to Air Law.

In the open FIR, with unlimited visibility and no cloud,
land at the nearest suitable aerodrome and inform ATC.

EASA Private Pilot Studies

12-18

Purchased by Andrew Done, andrewdone@fastmail.com #20310022


12

CO M M U N I C AT I O N S

Distress & Urgency

DISTRESS & URGENCY

Intercepti ng Distress Transmiss ions

© Phil Croucher Electrocution Technical Publishers 2021

An emergency exists the moment you become doubtful
about position, fuel, weather, or anything else that could
affect the safety of your flight. The first transmission
should be on the frequency in use at the time, then the
international one of 121.5 MHz, followed by others (the
auxiliary frequency is 123.1 MHz).
The first station receiving a Distress or Urgency call (see
below) should acknowledge it and take immediate action
to ensure that the necessary information is made available
to ATC and the operating agency, and take control of
communications if necessary, including imposing radio
silence by saying Stop Transmitting - MAYDAY, after
which everyone should keep quiet (this may also be done
by the aircraft in distress). If and when the threat is over,
the Distress call must be cancelled by notification on ALL
frequencies on which the original message was sent.
Distress/Urgency messages must include the nature of the
emergency, fuel endurance and persons on board.

Fuel Emergenc ies
In UK, flight crews of aircraft short on fuel must declare a
PAN or MAYDAY to ensure being given the appropriate
priority. The phrase No Delay Expected means holding
will be less than 20 minutes before starting an approach.

Distress transmissions are normally given out on the
frequency in use at the time, but when over the high seas,
say when flying offshore, you will typically be guarding
one of the distress frequencies, either 121.5 MHz, 243
MHz or 2182 KHz for merchant shipping. ELTs operate on
121.5 MHz and 406 MHz.
Under ICAO Annex 12, para 5.7, if you hear a distress
transmission, you must:
• Acknowledge the transmission (if somebody else
does that before you, then it may be a good idea to
maintain radio silence)
• Record the position of the craft in distress, if given
• Take a bearing on the transmission
• Inform the appropriate ATS unit or RCC
• At your discretion, whilst awaiting further
instructions, proceed to the position given. Once
there, if a rescue is in progress, do not interfere
without checking with whoever is in charge
If you need to direct another craft to the scene, circle it at
least once, fly low just in front and rock the fuselage, then
fly off in the direction you want them to go.
You can use the same signals when they are finished with,
but fly behind instead. In theory, they should hoist the
Code Pennant, which is a flag with vertical red and white

EASA Private Pilot Studies

12-19

Purchased by Andrew Done, andrewdone@fastmail.com #20310022


12

CO M M U N I C AT I O N S

Distress & Urgency

stripes, close up, or flash a series of Ts in Morse Code
with a lamp. On the other hand, they could just turn in the
direction requested. A blue and white chequered flag
means Much Regret, Unable (i.e. NO), as does a series of
Ns in Morse.

Dis tress

© Phil Croucher Electrocution Technical Publishers 2021

The Distress call (MAYDAY) is used when threatened by
grave and imminent danger and in most urgent need of
immediate assistance. You can use the letters SOS in
Morse Code (SOS), or the spoken words MAYDAY,
repeated 3 times, followed by relevant details, like your
position, and what is happening:
MAYDAY MAYDAY MAYDAY
Name of station addressed
Callsign (e.g. G-JLBI)
Type (e.g. Helicopter)
Nature of emergency (e.g. Total Engine Failure)
Intentions of PIC
Position (e.g. 20 Miles E of London VOR)
Pilot qualifications*
Any other information e.g. endurance remaining,
number of people on board (POB), aircraft colour/
markings, survival aids.

messages as it may help the controller to plan a course of
action best suited to the pilot’s ability. Such information
could include:
• Student - Solo student pilots shall prefix the aircraft
callsign with STUDENT to indicate their lack of
experience. Although intended primarily for ab
initio students, the prefix shall also be used in other
circumstances where, for example, the holder of a
valid licence is returning to flying practice after a
significant absence and is undergoing renewal
training involving solo flight conducted as a student
under supervision of a flight instructor.
• No Instrument Qualification
• IMC Rating
• Full Instrument Rating
Repeat as necessary. You can also fire rockets or red lights
at short intervals, and parachute flares. Control of distress
traffic is the responsibility of the aircraft in distress.

*There is no ICAO requirement to include pilot
qualifications in a distress message, but this information
should be included whenever possible in UK emergency
EASA Private Pilot Studies

12-20

Purchased by Andrew Done, andrewdone@fastmail.com #20310022


12

CO M M U N I C AT I O N S

Distress & Urgency

Urgency

To cancel a MAYDAY:
• State MAYDAY once
• Say ALL STATIONS three times
• Aircraft ID
• Station called
• Time
• Name of station in distress
• DISTRESS TRAFFIC ENDED
• Station called
• OUT

© Phil Croucher Electrocution Technical Publishers 2021

You could also use CANCEL DISTRESS.
Distress frequencies are:
• 121.5 MHz - VHF Aeronautical Emergency
Frequency.
• 243 MHz - UHF Military Emergency Frequency.
• 500 KHz - MF International Distress Frequency.

The Urgency call (or PAN) spoken three times, indicates a
very urgent message concerning the safety of a ship,
aircraft or other vehicle, or of some person on board or in
sight, but immediate assistance is not required. It has
priority over all other messages except Distress (above). If
you just wish to mention that you are compelled to land,
but don't need help right away, switch the landing lights
and/or navigation lights on and off in an irregular pattern.
Include as much information as you can, but the format
follows that of Distress:
PAN PAN PAN PAN PAN PAN
Name of station addressed
Callsign (e.g. G-JLBI)
Type (e.g. Helicopter)
Nature of emergency (e.g. Total Engine Failure)
Intentions of PIC
Position (e.g. 20 Miles E of London VOR)
Pilot qualifications*
Any other information

• 2182 KHz - MF International Distress Frequency
(this is officially in the MF band, but most HF
radios can deal with it).
The squawk code for an emergency is 7700.
Tip: If you don’t have time to change the squawk, keep
pressing the Ident.
EASA Private Pilot Studies

12-21

Purchased by Andrew Done, andrewdone@fastmail.com #20310022


12

CO M M U N I C AT I O N S

Propagation & Frequencies

PROPAGATION & FREQUENCIES
Review the first part of Radio Navigation, particularly
Emission Classifications, Attenuation, Frequency
Allocations and the heights and distances at which you
can receive transmissions.

INTERCEPTION

© Phil Croucher Electrocution Technical Publishers 2021

Already covered in Air Law.

EASA Private Pilot Studies

12-22
