FUNDAMENTALS OF
AIR TRAFFIC
CONTROL
FIFTH EDITION

This page intentionally left blank

FUNDAMENTALS OF
AIR TRAFFIC
CONTROL
FIFTH EDITION

Michael S. Nolan
Purdue University

Australia • Brazil • Japan • Korea • Mexico • Singapore • Spain • United Kingdom • United States

This is an electronic version of the print textbook. Due to electronic rights restrictions,
some third party content may be suppressed. Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed
content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. The publisher reserves the right
to remove content from this title at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it. For
valuable information on pricing, previous editions, changes to current editions, and alternate
formats, please visit www.cengage.com/highered to search by ISBN#, author, title, or keyword for
materials in your areas of interest.

Fundamentals of Air Traﬃc Control, 5th Edition
Michael S. Nolan
Vice President, Editorial: Dave Garza
Director of Learning Solutions: Sandy Clark
Executive Editor: David Boelio
Managing Editor: Larry Main
Senior Product Manager: Sharon Chambliss
Editorial Assistant: Jillian Borden
Vice President, Marketing: Jennifer McAvey

© 2011 International Code Council
Line Illustrations copyright © 2009 by International Code Council and
Delmar, Cengage Learning.
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the copyright herein
may be reproduced, transmitted, stored, or used in any form or by any means
graphic, electronic, or mechanical, including but not limited to photocopying,
recording, scanning, digitizing, taping, Web distribution, information
networks, or information storage and retrieval systems, except as permitted
under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without the
prior written permission of the publisher.

Executive Marketing Manager: Deborah S. Yarnell
Marketing Manager: Jimmy Stephens
Marketing Specialist: Mark Pierro
Production Director: Wendy Troeger
Production Manager: Mark Bernard
Content Project Manager: Barbara LeFleur

For product information and technology assistance, contact us at
Professional Group Cengage Learning Customer &
Sales Support, 1-800-648-7450
For permission to use material from this text or product,
submit all requests online at cengage.com/permissions.
Further permissions questions can be e-mailed to
permissionrequest@cengage.com.

Art Director: Benj Gleeksman
Technology Project Manager: Christopher Catalina

Library of Congress Control Number: 2009934177

Production Technology Analyst: Thomas Stover

ISBN-13: 978-1-4354-8272-2
ISBN-10: 1-4354-8272-7

Delmar
5 Maxwell Drive
Clifton Park, NY 12065-2919
USA
Cengage Learning is a leading provider of customized learning solutions with
oﬃce locations around the globe, including Singapore, the United Kingdom,
Australia, Mexico, Brazil and Japan. Locate your local oﬃce at: international.
cengage.com/region
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by
Nelson Education, Ltd.
For your lifelong learning solutions, visit delmar.cengage.com
Visit our corporate website at cengage.com.
Notice to the Reader
Publisher does not warrant or guarantee any of the products described herein or perform any independent analysis in connection with
any of the product information contained herein. Publisher does not assume, and expressly disclaims, any obligation to obtain and
include information other than that provided to it by the manufacturer. The reader is expressly warned to consider and adopt all safety
precautions that might be indicated by the activities described herein and to avoid all potential hazards. By following the instructions
contained herein, the reader willingly assumes all risks in connection with such instructions. The publisher makes no representations
or warranties of any kind, including but not limited to, the warranties of ﬁtness for particular purpose or merchantability, nor are any
such representations implied with respect to the material set forth herein, and the publisher takes no responsibility with respect to such
material. The publisher shall not be liable for any special, consequential, or exemplary damages resulting, in whole or part, from the
readers’ use of, or reliance upon, this material.

Printed in United States of America
1 2 3 4 5 XX 12 11 10

CONTENTS
Preface

xv

Chapter 1
History of Air Trafﬁc Control 1
1903–1925 2
Early Aviation Developments 2
Development of Airmail Service 2
The Morrow Report 3
1925–1934 3
Air Commerce Act 3
Evolution of Air Traffic Control

4

1934–1945 10
Establishment of the Bureau of Air Commerce 10
En route Air Traffic Control 11
Copeland Committee 14
Civil Aeronautics Act of 1938 15
1940 Reorganization of the CAA 16
The War Years 17
Civilian versus Military Air Traffic Control 18
1945–1955 19
RTCA Special Committee 31 Report
Air Traffic Congestion 20

19

1955–1965 22
Implementation of Radar 22
Budget Cutbacks 23
The Question of Airway Safety 24
Creation of the Federal Aviation Agency

25

vi / Contents
The New York City Disaster 27
Project Beacon 28
Controller Unionization 30
1965–1981 31
Department of Transportation
Continued Labor Unrest 32
Airline Deregulation 33
Controllers’ Strike of 1981 34

31

1981–2001 36
September 11, 2001 37
ATC Privatization 39
ATC Modernization 39
En route Automation Modernization
Air Traffic Controller Staffing 40

Chapter 2
Navigation Systems

40

44

Visual Navigation 46
Pilotage 46
Aeronautical Charts 46
Dead Reckoning 49
Flight Planning 49
Aircraft Instrumentation 49
Magnetic Compass 49
Heading Indicator 52
VFR Navigation 53
Instrument Flying 55
Electronic Navigation 56
Four-Course Radio Range 56
Introduction of Marker Beacons 57
Nondirectional Beacons 58
Automatic Direction Finder 58
Compass Locators 59
Visual Aural Range 59
VHF Omnidirectional Range (VOR) 60
Airway Altitudes 66
Airway Designators 67
Aircraft Positioning Methods 67
DME Position Determination 70
Tactical Air Navigation (TACAN) 72
VORTAC 73

Contents

Area Navigation 75
Doppler Radar 75
Course-Line Computers 77
LORAN 79
LORAN-C 80
Global Navigation Satellite System 84
Global Positioning System 84
Receiver Autonomous Integrity Monitoring 86
GNSS Augmentation 87
Wide Area Augmentation System (WAAS) 87
Ground-Based Augmentation System 87
Inertial Navigation System 89
Performance-Based Navigation 90
Required Navigation Performance 90
Special Aircraft and Aircrew Authorization Required
Instrument Approach Procedures 92
Segments of an Instrument Approach Procedure

92

93

Approach Navigation Aid Classiﬁcations 101
Terminal VOR 101
Instrument Landing System 102
Simplified Directional Facility 119
GPS-Based Instrument Approaches 120
GPS Approach Waypoints 120
Approach and Landing procedures 121
Lateral Navigation (LNAV) 122
Approaches with Vertical Guidance 122
Lateral Navigation/Vertical Navigation (LNAV/VNAV) 122
Localizer Performance with Vertical Guidance (LPV) 122
Runway and Approach Lighting 123
Runway Lighting 123
Approach Lighting Systems 126
VFR Approach Lighting Systems 131

Chapter 3
Air Traffic Control System Structure

138

Airspace Classification 139
General Categories of Airspace 139
Controlled versus Uncontrolled Airspace 140
Airspace Review 140
IFR Flight in Controlled Airspace (Class A, B, C, D, and E)
Air Traffic Control Clearance 144

141

/

vii

viii / Contents
IFR Flight in Uncontrolled Airspace 153
VFR Flight in Controlled Airspace 153
VFR Flight in Uncontrolled Airspace 155
Airspace Classes 155
Class A Airspace 163
Class B Airspace 165
Class C Airspace 169
Class D Airspace 172
Special VFR 174
Class E Airspace 174
Federal Airways 176
Flight Levels 176
Airway Dimensions 180
High-Altitude Redesign Project 180
Navigation Reference System 181
Tango Routes 182
Class F Airspace 182
Class G Airspace 182
Special Use Airspace 184
Nonregulatory Special Use Airspace 186
Airport Advisory Areas 187
Military Training Routes 187

Chapter 4
Airport Air Trafﬁc Control Communications:
Procedures and Phraseology 190
Radio Communication 191
Simplex versus Duplex 191
Frequency Assignments 193
Radio Operation 194
Standard Phraseology for Verbal Communications
ATC Communications Procedures 204
Clearance 205
Aircraft Identification 206
Destination Airport or Intermediate Fix 210
Departure Instructions 210
Route of Flight 211
Altitude Assignment 211
Required Reports 214
Holding Instructions 215
Additional Communications Phraseology 217

195

Contents

Chapter 5
Air Traffic Control Procedures and Organization 220
Separation Responsibilities in Controlled Airspace 221
Air Trafﬁc Control Procedures 224
Military Use of Civilian Airspace 224
Air Defense Identification Zones 225
Foreign Air Traffic Control Services 228
Privately Operated ATC Facilities 228
Delegation of Responsibility 229
Handoff Procedures 230
Preferential Routes 234
Approval Requests and Coordination

234

Controller Duties in an Air Route Trafﬁc Control Center 237
Flight Data Controllers 237
Radar Controllers 237
Radar Associate/Nonradar Controller 237
Air Trafﬁc Control Tower Responsibilities 237
Ground Control 238
Local Control 239
Approach and Departure Control 239

Chapter 6
Control Tower Procedures

241

Control Towers 242
Flight Data Controller Duties 242
Receiving and Relaying IFR Departure Clearances 243
Operating the Flight Data Processing Equipment 246
Relaying Weather and NOTAM Information 248
Clearance Delivery Controller Duties
Ground Controller Duties 252
Preventing Runway Incursions 252
Protecting Critical Areas 255
Local Controller Duties 256
Runway Separation 256
Arriving Aircraft 260
Land and Hold Short Operations
Spacing Aircraft 266
Spacing Instructions 267
Runway Selection 270
Runway Use Programs 270

265

250

/

ix

x / Contents
Helicopter Operations 271
Wake Turbulence 272

Chapter 7
Nonradar En Route and Terminal Separation 279
Design of Separation Procedures

280

Airspace Dimensions 283
Separation Procedures 285
Vertical Separation 285
Lateral Separation 290
Holding Patterns 294
Longitudinal Separation 300
Initial Separation of Aircraft 308
Visual Separation 315

Chapter 8
Theory and Fundamentals of Radar Operation 318
History of Radar

319

Development of Pulse Radar 320
Components of Radar Systems 322
Ground Clutter 328
Transmitter Frequency 328
Receiver Controls 329
Receiver Gain 329
Moving Target Indicator 330
Moving Target Detection 336
Merge/Tracking 337
Sensitivity Time Control 337
Transmitter Controls

338

Display Controls 339
Range Select 339
Range Mark Interval and Intensity
Receiver Gain 339
Video Map 340
Sweep Decenter 341

339

Types of Air Trafﬁc Control Radar 342
Precision Approach Radar 342
Airport Surveillance Radar 344

Contents

ASR-9 345
ASR-11 346
FPS-20 347
ARSR-1 347
ARSR-2 347
ARSR-3 347
ARSR-4 348
Airport Surface Detection Equipment 348
ASDE-X 348
Precision Runway Monitor 350
Air Trafﬁc Control Radar Beacon System 351
Development of ATCRBS 352
ATCRBS Display 354
Secondary Radar System Deficiencies 355
Mode-S 357
Traffic Collision and Avoidance System 358
Traffic Information Service 359
Computerized Radar Systems 360
Automated Radar Terminal System 361
ARTS-III 363
ARTS-IIIA Operational Characteristics 366
Versions of ARTS-III 369
ARTS-II 370
Common ARTS 371
STARS 372
Radar Data Processing 373
Display System Replacement 375
User Request Evaluation Tool 376
ERAM 377
Enhanced Backup Surveillance 379
Center Radar ARTS Presentation 379

Chapter 9
Radar Separation

381

Aircraft Identiﬁcation 382
Primary Radar Identification 382
Secondary Surveillance Radar Identification
Transfer of Radar Identiﬁcation 386
Handoff Procedures 387
Point Out Procedures 389
Basic Radar Separation 390
Separation Standards 391

383

/

xi

xii / Contents
Radar-Assisted Navigation

399

Radar Arrivals and Approaches
Approach Gate 403
Arrival Instructions 403
ASR Approach 405

401

Radar Trafﬁc Information 408
Use of Automation Tools 412
User Request Evaluation Tool 412

Chapter 10
Operation in the National Airspace System 417
Overview of an IFR Flight 418
Flight Planning and IFR Clearances 418
Coded Departure Routes 418
Traffic Flow Management Programs 420
Alternative Routes 424
Clearance Delivery 424
Phoenix Airspace 429
Ground Control Coded Departure Routes 431
Local Control 433
Departure Control 435
En route Separation 438
Miles in Trail Restrictions 443
Metering 443
Delay Techniques 443
Approach Control 445
Indianapolis Approach Control 445
Local Control 451
Example of a VFR Flight 453
Lafayette to Champaign 453
Overdue Aircraft 460

Chapter 11
Oceanic and International Air Trafﬁc Control 463
International Air Trafﬁc Control 464
Canadian Air Trafﬁc Control
International Airspace 466
Airport Identifiers 467

465

Contents

European Air Trafﬁc Control 469
Atlantic Ocean Air Trafﬁc Control 470
North Atlantic Separation 471
MNPS Airspace Operations 472
MNPS Airspace Separation 477
ATOPS/Ocean 21 480
Trans-Polar Flights 480
Alternate Airports and Fuel Temperature 481
Communication and Navigation 482

Chapter 12
The Future of the National Airspace System
Automated Air Trafﬁc Control 486
Procedural Separation Standards 487
ATC Modernization 488
Current ATC Initiatives 489
Departure Delay Program 489
En route Metering Program 489
En route Sector Loading Program 490
Procedural Changes 491
National Route Program 491
CNS Improvements 491
Communications System Changes 492
Required Navigation Performance 494
Navigation Security 495
Surveillance Systems 496
Air Trafﬁc Management 497
Hardware 498
Next Generation Air Traffic Control (NextGen)
Major Components of NextGen 499
Trajectory-Based Operations 499
Flexible Airspace Management 500
Collaborative Air Traffic Management 500
Negotiated Routes 503
Improved Aircraft Separation 504
Additional ADS Functions 504
En route Automation Modernization 505

498

485

/

xiii

xiv / Contents

Chapter 13
The Federal Aviation Administration 507
Administrative Structure 508
FAA Operations 508
FAA Organization 508
Administrative Structure 508
Administrator and Deputy Administrator
Associate Administrators 510
FAA Regional Offices 511
Air Traffic Organization 512

510

Getting Hired by the FAA 515
Controller Hiring Sources 515
Certified Controllers 515
Approved College Programs 515
Medical Examination 517
Security Investigation 517
Application Process 518
FAA Academy Training 518
Field Training Program 519
Salaries 519
Locality Pay

523

ATC Facility Classifications 523
FAA Air Traffic Control Facilities 523
Federal Contract Air Traffic Control Services
Flight Service Stations 540

Appendix A
IFR Aeronautical Charts

543

Appendix B
Aircraft Models and Performance
Appendix C
Three-Letter Identiﬁers
Glossary 603
Common Abbreviations 634
References

638

Photo Credits
Index

641

640

524

599

589

PREFACE
This book was started over 20 years ago after having searched long and hard
for an appropriate college-level textbook on air traffic control. Various Federal
Aviation Administration publications have been available for years, as have commercial introductory texts. However, most of these books either describe rules
and regulations or take a simplistic approach to how the air traffic control system
works. No text has described how the ATC system works and why it operates
the way it does. This book remedies that situation. It describes the background
and history of the development of the air traffic control system, emphasizing why
things are done the way they are, instead of simply repeating rules and regulations. Throughout the text, appropriate real-life examples are used to illustrate
the reasoning behind procedures used by air traffic controllers. The liberal use of
figures and example phraseology assists the student in achieving an overall understanding of the air traffic control system. It is hoped that with this knowledge,
future air traffic controllers will have a far better understanding of their chosen
profession and can make the appropriate decisions that will lead aviation into the
next century. There are many unique features to this textbook that are not found
in any other text on air traffic control. These features include the following.
What’s New
in This Edition

• New, required performance-based operation standards including navigation,
communications, and surveillance
• Examples of RNP in both the en route and terminal environment
• Information on LNAV and VNAV approaches as well as similar variants
• Updated Atlantic, Pacific, and Arctic navigation procedures
• 9/11 history and required security changes to air traffic control
• Updated flight examples including the use of traffic flow management
• New ATC systems including ASR-11, STARS, and ERAM
• NextGen operations and timeline

xvi / Preface
History and
Background

The history of the development of the air traffic control system and many of its
components is included throughout the book. This history is not intended to be
a dry repeat of names and dates but rather an explanation of past decisions that
dramatically affected the current air traffic control system.

Illustrations,
Charts, and
Photographs

Abundant illustrations, charts, and photographs are provided in this textbook.
Air traffic control is a three-dimensional, visually oriented profession that cannot be explained simply through the use of text. These illustrations were designed
to supplement the text, further explaining concepts and ideas that are difficult
for the inexperienced student to visualize when simply reading about them.

Examples
and
Phraseology

One of the most important tasks facing a controller is the proper use of phraseology. The air traffic control system is based on comprehension and usage of
strange and sometimes hard to understand wording. In addition to explaining
the proper use of terms, the text includes numerous examples of the proper
usage of phraseology.

Real-Life
Examples

Throughout the text, examples found in real life are used to further explain the
concepts introduced. In addition, one entire chapter is dedicated to the actual
operation of the air traffic control system. “Behind the scenes” activities and
coordination are described, using sample flights through actual airspace. Such
examples reinforce the material introduced in earlier chapters, further clarifying and explaining some of the complicated procedures used to separate air
traffic above the United States.
The first four chapters of this text prepare the student for understanding
the intricate procedures used in controlling air traffic. These four chapters cover
fundamental topics, such as history, navigation, and phraseology. Chapters 5
through 11 detail the separation of aircraft in the ATC system. Chapter 12 takes
an in-depth look at the future of air traffic control, and Chapter 13 discusses
employment opportunities for air traffic controllers. At the conclusion of the
text is a detailed glossary of terms introduced in the book.

Collegiate
Training
Initiative

This textbook has been designed with the Federal Aviation Administration’s
College Training Initiative in mind. This program was developed to provide
education to future FAA controllers. The material in this textbook provides
much of the knowledge needed by tomorrow’s air traffic controllers.

Acknowledgements

I would like to thank the following individuals who have made this textbook
possible. Without their gracious help and assistance, it would have been impossible to complete this book: Juanita Hull, Federal Aviation Administration;
James Cheesman, SRSA Corporation; Mike Pearson, aviation attorney, professor, and air traffic controller; Jeff Berry, ZID controller; Denise Mason from
IND tower; and the entire staff and management of the Champaign, Lafayette,
and Phoenix ATCTs as well as Indianapolis ATCT and ARTCC.
Over the course of the development and maintenance of this book, many
reviewers have made helpful suggestions: Roger Bacchieri, Daniel Webster College; Peter Bailey, Wilmington College; Peggy Baty, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical
University; Terry S. Bowman, Southern Illinois University; Jeffry B. Burbridge,

Preface

/

xvii

Catonsville Community College; Jonathan R. Burke, Metropolitan State
College of Denver; Veronica T. Cote, Bridgewater State College; Michael Farley, Bridgewater State College; Bruce D. Hoover, Palo Alto College; Roger
Matteson, Central Washington University; Patrick K. Mattson, St. Cloud State
University; Mary Ozimkowski, Metropolitan State College; Keith Parkman,
Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University; Martha Pearce, Arizona State University; Michael J. Polay, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University; Robert Rogus,
Mt. San Antonio College; Jose Ruiz, Southern Illinois University; Robert
H. Ryder, Delta State University; Thomas Teller, Daniel Webster College; and
Henry Whitney, Mt. San Antonio College.
This edition was reviewed by David West, Mt. San Antonio College; Les
Wilkinson, Aims Community College; Trena M. Mathis, Minneapolis Community & Technical College; and Dr. Jose R. Ruiz, Southern Illinois University,
Carbondale. Thank you everyone.
The air traffic control system in the United States is truly a system, which
means that it requires the efforts of many individuals in order for it to work. I’ve
found that publishing a textbook is much the same. Although my name is on the
cover, only the concerted efforts of a diligent, professional, and very talented group
of people made it possible for this book to be published. Everyone involved was
just as important as everyone else, as is the case in any system. We should all be
very thankful for their work and effort. I sure am. The first edition was completed
in 1990 through the efforts of a group of individuals at both Wadsworth and
Delmar Associates. Although many of them are no longer connected with this project, their legacy lives on, and I remember them fondly. They include Anne ScanlanRohrer, aviation editor at Wadsworth, and her editorial assistants, Leslie With,
Karen Moore, and Cathie Fields. Jackie Estrada, Richard Carter, Detta Penna,
Robin Witkin, and Nancy Sjoberg developed the layout and most of the illustrations for the first edition. Thanks to one and all. The second edition was coordinated by Ruth Cottrell of Ruth Cottrell Books and Jennie Burger of Wadsworth,
assisted by Barbara Britton and Charles Cox; and the third edition by Tobi Giannone of Michael Bass Associates and Marie Carigma-Sambilay of Wadsworth,
assisted by Hal Humphrey and Karen Hunt. The fourth edition was coordinated
by Andy Sieverman of G&S Typesetters and Carol Benedict of Wadsworth. They
were assisted by Belinda Krohmer and Jessica Reed. The fifth edition was led by
David Boelio, executive editor; Jillian Borden, editorial assistant; Sharon Chambliss, senior product manager; and Barbara LeFleur, content project manager.
I can never thank all of these people enough. They continually teach me
how to revise and edit this text in an attempt to keep it up to date. They are the
book experts, responsible for the ultimate product you see before you. They
were indispensable members of our system. Without them, this project could
never have been accomplished. And, of course I must thank my wife, Barbara,
and my three children, Linda, Erin, and David, who gave up a lot of their time
with Daddy so he could publish this text. It started before they were born and
now they are reading it in college!
I am indebted to each and every one of you.
Mike Nolan

xviii / Preface
Michael S. Nolan (B.S., Industrial Technology, Illinois State University;
M.S., Instructional Development and Educational Computing, Purdue University) is a former air traffic controller and holds licenses and certification as a
commercial pilot, flight instructor, instrument instructor, tower operator, airframe and powerplant mechanic, and aviation weather observer. He has taught
a variety of aviation courses at the University of Illinois and at Chanute Air
Force Base as well as at Purdue University, where he currently teaches in the
Aviation Technology Department.

1
History of Air Trafﬁc Control
Checkpoints
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Discuss the signiﬁcance of the Airmail Act of 1925.
2. Describe how the federal government became involved in air trafﬁc control.
3. Discuss the history of the various federal agencies involved in air trafﬁc control.
4. Discuss the formation of organized labor unions as they pertain to air trafﬁc
control.
5. Identify the organizations currently involved in the air trafﬁc control system.
6. Identify the various organizations that have represented air trafﬁc controllers.
7. Identify some of the methods air trafﬁc controllers used in the past to separate
aircraft.
8. The effects of 9/11 on the air trafﬁc control system.

2 / CHAPTER 1

1903–1925
Early Aviation
Developments

When the Wright brothers’ experiment in flight succeeded on December 17,
1903, the world took little notice. Newspapers of that era either did not
believe or belittled the accomplishments of the two brothers on that cold,
blustery morning. At the start of the twentieth century, most people regarded
aviation as a pastime for experimenters and daredevils. It was hard to believe
that the tiny, underpowered aircraft of that era would ever evolve into a useful
form of transportation. In this early period of experimentation, anyone with
a mechanical aptitude could design, build, and fly an aircraft without passing any type of test or possessing any type of license. Without regulation or
certification, people began to build and quite regularly crash these early flying
machines. The general public was frightened by the machines and believed
that only fools would fly in them. Potential investors in this new industry were
fearful of risking their capital to finance an unproven and apparently dangerous industry.
In spite of this climate of fear and distrust, aviation pioneers began to
demonstrate the usefulness of their primitive flying machines. As early as 1911,
the first mail was carried by air. By the time the United States became involved
in World War I, the airplane had demonstrated its usefulness as an observation
platform and as a crude weapons delivery system.
After the war, numerous additional uses were found for the airplane. The
Post Office Department began to offer routine airmail service in 1918, using
U.S. Army pilots and aircraft. In 1919, the U.S. Department of Agriculture
initiated experiments that would lead to the commercial use of aircraft for the
application of pesticides. The first transatlantic crossing was made that year,
which also saw the first experimental use of radio as a navigation aid.

Development
of Airmail
Service

Between 1918 and 1925, airmail service was expanded by the Post Office
Department until full transcontinental service was finally achieved. Until
1923, most of the mail was flown during daylight hours, since a safe, reliable
form of nighttime navigation had not been developed. In 1921 the first experimental night flight was conducted, using bonfires located along the navigation
route. These bonfires were replaced in 1923, when a 72-mile stretch of airway
between Dayton and Columbus, Ohio, was experimentally lit with electric
and gas arc lighting. The experiment proved successful, and airway lighting
was soon introduced across the country. By 1924 the portion of the transcontinental airway between Cheyenne, Wyoming, and Chicago, Illinois, was
lit, and routine night flights were being conducted along this section of
the airway.
By 1925, the commercial potential for aviation had been established, and
the Post Office Department found itself under pressure to expand airmail service at a faster rate than was possible for a government agency. Since aviation
appeared to be a commercially viable industry, it was felt that airmail service
could now be handled by private airline companies. A resolution to permit

History of Air Trafﬁc Control

/

3

private contracting, introduced by Congressman Clyde Kelly of Pennsylvania,
was signed into law on February 2, 1925, and became known as the Airmail
Act of 1925. The Airmail Act authorized the postmaster general to contract
with private individuals and corporations for the purpose of transporting airmail. Between 1925 and 1927, airmail contracts were bid to private corporations, and commercial aviation became a reality.
After this act was signed into law, many companies that had been sitting
on the sidelines earnestly jumped into the aviation field. Boeing, Douglas, and
Pratt and Whitney were just a few of the companies that bid to supply aircraft
and engines to the budding airmail industry. Even the great Henry Ford entered
the picture, producing the famous Ford Trimotor and operating an air cargo
airline between Detroit and Chicago.
The Morrow
Report

With this increase in air activity came an increased desire for some type of
national regulation of the industry. Prior to this time, individual states had
reserved the right to test and certify pilots, but many were hesitant to exercise
this authority. The aviation industry was still fragile, and public sentiment
favored federal government regulation to unify the industry through a common
set of rules, procedures, and certifications. It was felt that government regulations were needed if the aviation industry were to grow and prosper. Without
this regulation, the public’s trust could not be gained.
A joint congressional committee recommended the formation of an advisory board composed of prominent businessmen to recommend the possible
extent of federal involvement in the aviation industry. In 1924, President Calvin
Coolidge appointed Dwight Morrow to head this board and make recommendations as to future government policy. The Morrow board presented its final
report to the president on December 2, 1925. The Morrow Report recommended that military and civilian aviation operate separately, with the Department of Commerce to be given the responsibility for the promotion and the
regulation of the civilian aviation industry.

1925–1934
Air
Commerce
Act

President Coolidge endorsed the findings of the Morrow Report and passed it
along to Congress. He requested that the board’s recommendations be implemented as soon as possible. After the inevitable discussion and negotiations,
Congress approved, and President Coolidge signed the Air Commerce Act into
law on May 20, 1926.
As Senator Hiram Bingham, who introduced the Air Commerce Act into
the Senate, explained, the purpose of the act was “not so much to regulate
as to promote civilian aviation.” The Air Commerce Act made it the duty of
the secretary of commerce (at that time Herbert Hoover) to encourage the
growth of the aviation industry through the establishment of airways and navigation aids. In addition, the secretary was authorized to regulate the industry

4 / CHAPTER 1
as necessary to elevate the public’s perception of aviation as a safe mode of
transportation. To this end, Hoover instituted a program to license pilots and
mechanics and to regulate the use of these airways. These responsibilities were
delegated to the Aeronautics Branch of the Department of Commerce, which
was headed by the new director of aeronautics, Clarence M. Young.
In May 1927, Charles Lindbergh captured the attention of the nation with
his daring flight across the Atlantic. During that same year, the first groundto-air experimental radio was installed in an aircraft. In 1928, the first seven
airmail-route radio stations were installed. Many of today’s airlines were born
in this era. Colonial Airlines (American), Western Express (TWA), Northwest
Airlines, and United Airlines were all formed during this exciting period of air
transportation growth.
Evolution of
Air Trafﬁc
Control

Prior to the early 1930s, there was little need for an organized system of air
traffic control in the United States. Almost all of the aerial traffic in this country
was conducted in daylight with clear flying conditions. Advances in aircraft
control and navigation that would permit flight at night or during periods of
restricted visibility had yet to be made. The practice of “see and be seen” became
the principal method of traffic avoidance. This meant that pilots could fly only
in conditions that would permit them to see other aircraft and alter their flight
path in time to avoid them.
According to this principle, pilots were required to fly clear of any clouds
and only in areas where the visibility was at least 3 miles. These rules have
been only slightly modified since then and are now known as visual flight rules
(VFR). (A discussion of the current version of these flight rules is presented in
Chapter 3.) Since the aircraft used by the airlines in the 1930s were relatively
slow and the pilots could readily see and avoid other aircraft, the establishment
of an organized air traffic control system was not deemed necessary. But by the
late 1930s, the capability of aircraft to fly at night and in marginal weather conditions had improved tremendously. Instrumentation that would permit pilots
to control the aircraft without visual reference to the natural horizon had been
designed. In addition, a system of ground-based radio navigation aids (navaids)
was being constructed to permit pilots to navigate without ground reference.
When this equipment was installed, pilots were able to take off, cruise en route,
and land in weather conditions that would not permit them to see and avoid
other aircraft.
Because all of these aircraft eventually had to land at an airport, it was
inevitable that the airspace within the immediate vicinity of busy airports
became congested, and some form of local air traffic control would soon be
needed. The problem of airspace congestion was compounded by the fact that
the airports of that era only remotely resembled the airports of today. An airport in the 1930s rarely had designated runways. It usually consisted of a large,
rectangular plot of land covered with either sod or cinders.
After flying over the airport to observe the wind direction, local traffic,
and runway conditions, the pilots themselves decided in which direction they
wished to land. During the approach and landing, the pilots were kept busy

History of Air Trafﬁc Control

/

5

trying to spot other aircraft, decide who had priority, and maneuver their planes
behind the others, allotting sufficient time for a previous plane to land, brake
to a stop, and taxi clear of the runway prior to their arrival. In addition, pilots
needed to constantly scan the airport surface area to detect aircraft taxiing for
takeoff. To decrease ground roll distance, pilots usually maneuvered their aircraft to land or take off into the wind. On windy days, this forced most of the
pilots to land and take off in the same direction. But on calm days, aircraft could
be seen landing and taking off in every direction. It was immediately apparent
that some form of air traffic control would have to be initiated around airports
or accidents would begin to occur at an increasing rate.

FAA

Air Traffic Controllers The earliest method of regulating takeoffs and landings required an air traffic controller to stand in a prominent location on the
airfield and use colored flags to communicate with the pilots. If the controller waved a green flag, it meant that the pilots were to proceed with their
planned takeoff or landing. But if the controller waved a red flag, the pilots
were to hold their position until the controller had determined that it was safe
to continue. At that time, the controller would wave the green flag, advising
the pilots that they could proceed. The first airport to hire this type of air
traffic controller was the St. Louis Airport in Missouri. In 1929, St. Louis
hired Archie League as the nation’s first air traffic controller (see Figure 1–1).

Figure 1–1. The first air
traffic controller, Archie
W. League, shown in his
winter clothing at the
St. Louis Lambert
Municipal Airport in 1929.

6 / CHAPTER 1

FAA

Before taking on this role, League had been a barnstormer, a mechanic, and
the operator of a flying circus.
League controlled air traffic from a wheelbarrow on which he had
mounted a beach umbrella. In the morning, he would pack the wheelbarrow
with a beach chair, water, a note pad, a pair of colored flags, and his lunch. He
would wheel his equipment out to the approach end of the runway, where he
would use the flags to advise the pilots to either continue their approach or hold
until the traffic was clear. At the end of the day, League would repack his equipment into the wheelbarrow and return to the terminal. He performed these
tasks both winter and summer, beginning a 36-year career in air traffic control
(see Figure 1–2). Other large cities soon saw the advantages of this system and
began to employ air traffic controllers at their own airports.
Although workable, this early, crude form of air traffic control had many
obvious drawbacks. Since the controller usually stood near the approach end of
the runway, he was far more likely to attract the attention of departing rather
than arriving aircraft. Pilots inbound for landing found it difficult to determine
which direction to land and to see the air traffic controller’s location. And if
more than one aircraft was inbound, it became difficult, if not impossible, for

Figure 1–2. Archie League standing next to a spotlight while guiding down an aircraft
during IFR weather.

History of Air Trafﬁc Control

/

7

FAA

the air traffic controller to give different instructions to each plane. It was also
difficult for the controller to determine whether the pilots had actually received
and understood the intended instructions. And it was impossible to use this
system of communication at night or during stormy weather. Fortunately, at
that time few aircraft flew during such weather conditions.
Light Guns In an attempt to rectify some of these problems, the controller’s
colored flags were soon replaced by light guns. A light gun is a device that permits the controller to direct a narrow beam of high-intensity colored light to a
specific aircraft (see Figure 1–3). Light guns were equipped with a gunsight that
let the controller accurately aim the beam of light at one particular aircraft. The
gun was also equipped with different-colored lenses to permit the controller
to easily change the color of the light.
The controller operated the light gun either from a glassed-in room on
top of a hangar, called a control tower, or from a portable light gun station
located near the arrival end of the runway.
The light gun signals used by the early controllers resembled the
colored-flag system. A red light advised the pilots to hold their aircraft,
whereas a green light advised them to proceed. Most of the busy airports
soon built control towers and installed these light guns. The control towers
were usually placed on top of one of the highest structures at the airport.
Controllers working in the tower now had an unobstructed view of the
airport and the surrounding airspace. They no longer had to stand out next
to the runway, exposed to the elements.
Light guns are still used today at most control towers. They are used
to communicate when either the radios in the control tower or the aircraft
Figure 1–3. Using a
are inoperative or when an aircraft is not radio equipped. The light gun
light gun signal.
code has not changed significantly since the 1930s. The official light gun
signals in use today are listed in Table 1–1.
Table 1–1.

Light Gun Signals
Color and
Type of Signal

Meaning with Respect
to Aircraft on the Ground

Meaning with Respect
to Aircraft in Flight

Steady green

Cleared for takeoff

Cleared to land

Flashing green

Cleared to taxi

Return for landing (to be
followed by a steady green
at the proper time)

Steady red

Stop

Give way to other aircraft
and continue circling

Flashing red

Taxi clear of runway in use

Airport unsafe, do not land

Flashing white

Return to starting point on
airport

Not applicable

Alternating red
and green

Exercise extreme caution

Exercise extreme caution

8 / CHAPTER 1
Although the light gun was an improvement over the colored-flag system
of air traffic control, a number of important deficiencies still remained. When
inbound to the airport, the pilots were usually busy flying their aircraft and
were unable to maintain a constant lookout for changing light gun signals.
As a result, the controller might not be able to transmit critical instructions to
pilots who were performing some other task and whose attention was diverted.
The light guns were also useless in bad weather, since airborne particles of dust
and moisture easily diffused and refracted the light beam. Furthermore, the
controller could never be quite sure whether the pilot had received or properly
interpreted the light gun signal. The controller could give instructions to the
pilots, but the pilots had no means for communicating to the air traffic controller. It was apparent that a reliable, two-way communications system would
have to be developed.
Radio Communication The modern system of air traffic control was born
at the Cleveland Airport in Ohio. The city of Cleveland constructed a control
tower on top of an old hangar and equipped this facility with radio transmitting and receiving equipment. The communications transmitters were 15-watt
radios that permitted voice communication with pilots over a distance of
approximately 15 miles. Using this primitive radio equipment, the air traffic
controller could communicate directly with the pilots of properly equipped
aircraft. In addition, the pilots could respond to these instructions or initiate
communication with the controllers. This system permitted the controllers to
issue traffic instructions, weather information, and airport landing conditions
to the pilots of radio-equipped aircraft. This voice communication could be
maintained night and day, in good weather or in bad.
The control tower was also equipped with light guns to permit controllers to communicate with aircraft that were not radio equipped. The light guns
were also used for backup communications in case the radio equipment in
either the control tower or the aircraft malfunctioned. By being located on top
of the highest structure at the airport, the controllers had an unobstructed
view of the airport surface area and the approaches to the landing area. This
permitted the controllers to issue instructions that would properly sequence
aircraft inbound for landing with those attempting to depart. Most of the busy
airports around the country followed Cleveland’s example and constructed
radio-equipped air traffic control towers (see Figure 1–4).
Despite the dramatic safety improvement that these towers offered, their
effectiveness was limited, since the primitive radio equipment was heavy, clumsy
to use, unreliable, and relatively expensive. The airlines were hesitant to install
this equipment on planes since it would replace valuable, revenue-producing
space on the aircraft. Furthermore, most of the small aircraft in use during this
era were manufactured with electrical systems that provided insufficient power
to operate the radios, and the owners were often unable to afford the expensive
electrical system modifications that would permit them to benefit from this
advance in air traffic control technology.

/

9

Michael Nolan

History of Air Trafﬁc Control

Figure 1–4. The control tower at Indianapolis’s Stout Field.

Air traffic controllers and pilots were also severely handicapped by the
lack of a standardized set of rules or phrases to be used when communicating
with each other. Some pilots contacted the control tower when they were 5 to
10 miles away from the airport, whereas other pilots neglected to contact the
controllers until they were almost ready to land. Even though the air traffic controllers were federally certified, they were still airport employees, and pilots had
no legal obligation to contact them. And if radio contact was established, there
was little agreement on the phraseology that should be used. Many pilots simply did not understand the instructions that were being transmitted to them.
Despite these serious limitations, this early form of air traffic control
worked remarkably well. Radio permitted the controllers to pass along valuable information and control instructions to the pilots of properly equipped
aircraft, and the pilots could acknowledge receipt of these instructions and
make accurate position reports to the controllers.
Instrument Flying At the same time that control towers were being constructed, aircraft designers were beginning to produce a new generation of
faster, higher flying transport aircraft specifically designed for airline operation. These aircraft were equipped with advanced instrumentation and
radio navigation equipment that would permit their pilots to fly in weather

10 / CHAPTER 1
conditions that had made navigation impossible just 10 years ago. Using these
instruments and the ground-based radio navigation aids installed by the federal government, the airlines began to routinely conduct flights of hundreds
of miles through cloud and fog with no outside reference. These flight conditions, where aircraft control and navigation are conducted solely by reference
to cockpit instrumentation, are known as instrument meteorological conditions (IMCs).
Pilots of properly equipped aircraft could now fly in conditions where
in-flight visibility might be measured in feet instead of miles. Pilots were able
to land when visibilities were less than 2 miles. Certainly in these flight conditions, the “see-and-be-seen” concept of aircraft separation was inadequate.
In addition, as the airlines introduced newer airliners into service such as the
DC-2, DC-3, and Boeing 247, the wide disparity in performance between these
aircraft and the older planes in service became more readily apparent. This mix
of aircraft with different cruising airspeeds and flight characteristics increased
the complexity involved in separating aircraft and made it much more difficult
for the air traffic controller to properly and safely sequence traffic inbound for
landing. The only reason that midair collisions occurred infrequently was that
few aircraft were flying in reduced visibility conditions at the same altitude, on
the same route, and at the same time.
By the early 1930s, the airspace around major airports had become increasingly crowded; people living around these airports felt that the risk of midair
collisions had increased and feared that colliding aircraft might crash into their
neighborhoods. These residents began to pressure the states and the localities
around the major airports to pass laws restricting air travel over their jurisdictions. It was apparent that utter chaos would result in the aviation industry if
every state enacted legislation restricting or banning flight over certain areas.
These restrictions would retard the growth of the airline industry and might
jeopardize its very existence.

1934–1945
Establishment
of the Bureau
of Air
Commerce

In response to this threat to the nation’s interstate commerce, in 1934 Congress
created the Bureau of Air Commerce (part of the Department of Commerce) as
the agency responsible for the regulation of traffic along the nation’s airways.
This act made the federal government responsible for the licensing of pilots, the
establishment of airways and navigation aids, and the actual separation and
safety of the aircraft using these airways. In 1936, the Bureau of Air Commerce
established rules to be followed by pilots when flying on the airways in instrument meteorological conditions. These rules are known as instrument flight
rules (IFR).
Because most of the major airports had already constructed and staffed
air traffic control towers, the most pressing need facing the aviation industry

History of Air Trafﬁc Control

/

11

was for the separation of aircraft flying between airports. The airways in the
eastern United States had become increasingly congested, and during periods
of IFR weather, near misses began to occur with increasing frequency. Some
form of traffic control on these busy airways would have to be established as
soon as possible.
As a result of Depression-era budget restrictions, the Department of Commerce was unable to quickly form an air traffic control system and requested
that the major airlines themselves take the initiative and develop a number of
airway traffic control units (ATCUs) that would separate aircraft operating
on the federal airways. The federal government promised that it would take
possession of and operate these facilities at a later date. On December 1, 1935,
TWA, American, Eastern, and United Airlines formed the first experimental
airway traffic control unit at the Newark (New Jersey) Airport (see Figure 1–5).
The responsibility of the ATCU was to separate traffic operating on the airway
during periods of IFR weather. During VFR weather, pilots flying the airways
would still separate themselves using the see-and-avoid principles of air traffic
control.
En route Air
Trafﬁc Control

FAA

Following the operational success of the first ATCU, the four airlines were
encouraged by the Department of Commerce to open additional units in

Figure 1–5. Controllers at the Newark ATCU separating en route traffic using maps
and shrimp boats.

12 / CHAPTER 1
Chicago, Cleveland, Pittsburgh, and Oakland. These ATCUs were opened a
short time thereafter and were staffed by employees of the airlines. By mutual
agreement, each of these ATCUs assumed responsibility for separating IFR
traffic within a selected area of airspace. It was not mandatory that every pilot
contact the ATCUs, however. Military and noncommercial civilian aircraft
were not required by law to contact the ATCUs. Fortunately, most of the IFRcertified aircraft were operated by the airlines.
Because of the technical limitations of 1930s radio equipment, all communication between the pilots and controllers was accomplished through an
intermediary, either an airline dispatcher or a radio operator. Whenever pilots
planned to fly in poor weather conditions, they filed an instrument flight plan
with an airline dispatch office. This flight plan included the type of aircraft to
be flown, the names of departure and arrival airports, the estimated departure
time and time en route, the airline flight number, the requested route of flight,
the aircraft’s cruising airspeed, and the requested cruising altitude.
The airline dispatcher on duty forwarded this information by telephone
to the ATCU with responsibility for the departure airport. The air traffic controllers on duty determined whether the route and altitude requested by the
pilot might conflict with other aircraft and modified the flight plan as necessary to ensure the safe separation of aircraft. The controllers then issued an
air traffic control clearance to the dispatcher that was to be relayed to the
pilot. This clearance included the departure time, route of flight, and cruising
altitude. The dispatcher relayed this information to the pilot, either in person
or by radio.
The air traffic controllers in the ATCU wrote the appropriate flight plan
information on a chalkboard and on a note card. This card was then attached
to a brass holder that was called a shrimp boat by the controllers because of its
resemblance to a small fishing boat. These shrimp boats would be moved along
an airway map, indicating the approximate positions of the aircraft as they flew
toward their destinations.
As each plane progressed through the ATCU’s airspace, the pilots would
transmit their position to an airline company radio operator, who then relayed
this information to the ATCU controller by telephone or telegraph. The ATCU
controllers updated the aircrafts’ information on their blackboard and note
cards and continued to move the shrimp boats along the map indicating each
plane’s approximate position. If a controller detected a potential conflict
between two aircraft, appropriate route or altitude changes would be issued to
one or both aircraft. These instructions were telephoned to the airline radio station nearest the last reported positions of the aircraft. The airline radio operator would then try to relay this information to the pilots. If the radio operator
was unable to contact the aircraft, the ATCU controller would telephone other
airline radio stations and ask that they try to make contact with the aircraft.
Because of the problems inherent with the frequencies used by radio transmitters and receivers of that era, the controller might be required to telephone
a number of radio operators before one could be found who could establish
contact with the desired aircraft. Under certain adverse weather conditions, the

History of Air Trafﬁc Control

/

13

radio operators might not be able to make contact with a particular aircraft
for hours at a time.
Normally, three air traffic controllers were on duty in the ATCU at any
one time. Each controller was assigned different job responsibilities. The “A”
controller was responsible for the safe separation of all the participating aircraft operating within the ATCU’s area of jurisdiction. Using the information
provided on the flight plan and gathered through position reports, the “A”
controller determined whether potential conflicts existed and undertook corrective action. The “A” controller communicated with the airline radio operators by telephone and issued the clearances that were then relayed to the
pilots. As position reports were obtained from the pilots, the “B” controller was
responsible for moving the shrimp boats across the airway map. In addition,
the “B” controller received updated weather reports and was responsible for
disseminating this information to the pilots. Using position reports obtained
from the pilots, the estimated airspeeds from the flight plans, and the estimated
winds aloft, the “C” controller calculated the future location of each aircraft.
The “C” controller wrote this information on the blackboard and on the note
cards attached to the shrimp boats. During periods of reduced staffing (such
as evenings, weekends, and holidays), there might be two or possibly only one
controller staffing the ATCU, and the responsibilities were divided evenly.
During periods of good weather, when pilots could legally fly under the
existing VFR flight rules, the ATCU controllers exercised passive control of the
aircraft. Passive control means that the controllers would track and update
the flight path of each aircraft and would advise the pilot of the presence of other
aircraft only if they were predicted to be within about 15 minutes’ flying time of
each other. The controllers would not issue any instructions to try to separate
these aircraft unless either pilot requested this service. Since the weather was
VFR, it was assumed that the pilots could see and avoid each other.
Whenever adverse weather conditions existed and the pilots were unable
to operate in VFR conditions, the controllers began to exercise active control
of air traffic along the airways. Active air traffic control assumes that the pilots
cannot see and avoid each other, and the controllers must issue instructions to
ensure that all participating aircraft remain safely separated (see Figure 1–6).
Although the air traffic control units were successful in accomplishing the
initial objective of separating aircraft along the busiest sections of the airways, a
number of problems were immediately apparent. Many airline companies were
operating in the United States, but only four of them were chosen to operate
the ATCUs. Any pilot who wished to participate in the air traffic control system
was required to file a flight plan and receive a clearance from the controllers at
the ATCU. The fact that the controllers were all employees of the four airline
companies led to numerous complaints of favoritism and of unjustified holding of competing and privately owned aircraft. In addition, the legal authority
of the ATCUs and their controllers was questionable. Pilots were not required
by law to file flight plans until August of 1936. An additional problem was
that few established or standardized procedures existed for the separation of
aircraft operating along the airways.

FAA

14 / CHAPTER 1

Figure 1–6. Controllers at the St. Louis Center in 1939 separating en route aircraft
using flight progress strips.

There was also little agreement as to how the transfer of control would
occur when the aircraft entered the local area around the airport. Since the air
traffic control towers were operated by the cities, whose controllers did not
even have to be federally certified, little agreement or coordination occurred
between the towers and the ATCUs.
On June 6, 1937, the Department of Commerce began to acquire the
ATCUs from the airlines and staff them with federally certified controllers.
The federal government renamed these facilities airway traffic control stations
(ATCSs). Many of the ATCU employees transferred from the airlines to the
government. In most cases, these employees took a considerable pay cut to do
so. With the acquisition of the ATCSs, the Department of Commerce began
to implement standardized air traffic control procedures. In May 1938, the
Department of Commerce also became the licensing authority for all civilian
air traffic controllers, both those employed in the ATCSs and those operating
the air traffic control towers.
Copeland
Committee

On May 6, 1935, a TWA airliner crashed outside of Kansas City, killing five
persons including Senator Bronson M. Cutting of New Mexico. This accident
and a number of other factors prompted Congress to commission a report on

History of Air Trafﬁc Control

/

15

air traffic safety and the operation of the Bureau of Air Commerce. The Senate
appointed Royal S. Copeland, the chairman of the Commerce Committee, to
head the commission. The preliminary report issued by this committee (known
as the Copeland Committee) was released on June 30, 1936. The report was a
scathing (and in retrospect very biased) indictment of the Bureau of Air Commerce. As a subordinate bureau in the Department of Commerce, the Bureau
of Air Commerce had become enmeshed in politics and had found it difficult
to improve the airway system in the midst of the Depression. The report blamed
the bureau for providing insufficient funding and maintenance of airway
navaids. At the same time, a Bureau of Air Commerce accident report placed
the blame for the crash on the pilots of the TWA aircraft. The controversy that
ensued harshly pointed out the problems in the nation’s air traffic control system. Both Congress and President Franklin D. Roosevelt decided that something needed to be done.
Civil
Aeronautics
Act of 1938

In a move to eliminate the Bureau of Air Commerce, on June 23, 1938, Congress passed the Civil Aeronautics Act, which in turn created the Civil Aeronautics Authority (CAA). The CAA became the only independent authority in the
U.S. government at that time. One of the Copeland Commission findings was
that the Bureau of Air Commerce had been assigned contradictory responsibilities. On the one hand, it was supposed to promote aviation, yet on the other
hand, it was supposed to regulate it. The bureau was responsible for operating
many components of the air traffic control system, but it was also responsible
for investigating accidents that might be caused by deficiencies in the air traffic
control (ATC) system itself.
To try to solve some of these problems, the Civil Aeronautics Act divided
the functions of the CAA into three groups. A five-person Civil Aeronautics
Authority was given the responsibility of issuing airline route certificates and
determining airline fares. The members of the authority were appointed by
the president and could be removed only for cause. An independent Air Safety
Board was also established to investigate aviation accidents and make safety
recommendations. Finally, a CAA administrator, to be appointed by the president, was charged with fostering aviation, maintaining the airways, and controlling air traffic. The administrator was subject to dismissal by the president
for any reason. To perform these various tasks, the CAA absorbed most of the
employees of the Bureau of Air Commerce.
The Civil Aeronautics Act also provided for CAA certification of air
traffic controllers who worked in the air traffic control towers. Most of the
tower controllers were still employed by the municipalities that owned and
operated the airports. At the same time, the CAA began a program to slowly
take possession of the control towers and their controller work force but was
hampered by budget restrictions imposed by Congress. By 1941, as America
approached the beginning of World War II, the CAA was finally able to absorb
the employees of most of the municipally operated air traffic control towers.
On July 1 of that year, the CAA established the Air Traffic Control Division,

16 / CHAPTER 1
which was given responsibility for operating the control towers and the newly
named airway traffic control centers (ATCCs).
Within a short time, it became obvious that the CAA organization
was unwieldy and defective, since the responsibilities of the three dominant
groups overlapped. For example, it was the Air Safety Board’s responsibility
to determine the cause of an accident, the five-man authority’s job to make
recommendations, and the administrator’s role to attempt to implement these
recommendations. No one group had either ultimate authority or responsibility for aviation safety. Institutional paralysis began to set in. Within a short
time, dissension among the three groups diminished the effectiveness of the
CAA as a whole. Public disagreement among the groups threatened to destroy
the CAA. President Roosevelt directed the Bureau of the Budget to undertake a
study of the CAA structure and make recommendations for reorganization.
1940
Reorganization of
the CAA

In 1940, under the authority conferred by the Reorganization Act of 1939, the
president chose to reorganize the CAA in accordance with the recommendations made by the Bureau of the Budget.
The functions of the Air Safety Board and the five-person authority were
combined into a new organization known as the Civil Aeronautics Board (CAB).
The CAB was placed administratively within the Department of Commerce but
exercised its duties with little outside influence. The Office of the Administrator was placed under the auspices of the Department of Commerce and was
renamed the Civil Aeronautics Administration (CAA). The independent status
of the Civil Aeronautics Authority turned out to be extremely short lived.
After the reorganization, civil air regulations (CARs) were mandated by
the CAA to give legal authority to its controllers when separating aircraft on
the nation’s airways. Under the CARs, by December 1, 1941, pilots wishing to
fly IFR would have to be certified by the Department of Commerce, and their
aircraft would have to carry federally mandated equipment. Every civilian pilot
flying IFR would be required to file a flight plan and follow the instructions
issued by the controllers manning the control towers and the ATCCs. Eventually, the old system of airline and municipal control would be dismantled and
a new era of federal control of the nation’s airspace would begin.
By November 1941, the CAA had established 23 ATCCs and controlled
100 percent of the civilian traffic operating on the federal airways during
instrument meteorological conditions. The CAA had also installed sufficient
navigation equipment to create federal airways that connected all of the major
cities and busy airports across the United States. The airspace used by these
airways was known as controlled airspace. This meant that during periods of
IFR weather, CAA controllers would be responsible for the separation of civilian aircraft in these areas. Much of the rest of the nation’s airspace was not a
part of the federal airway system; this space was designated as uncontrolled airspace. This meant that the CAA would not regulate or separate aircraft operating in these areas. Pilots were legally free to fly in uncontrolled airspace during
IFR weather conditions, but the CAA would not be responsible for separating
their aircraft. Even today, the federal government declines responsibility for the

History of Air Trafﬁc Control

/

17

separation and safety of aircraft flying in uncontrolled airspace. A complete
description of these and other airspace categories is provided in Chapter 3.
The War
Years

The beginning of World War II brought about lasting and important changes in
the structure of the CAA and aviation as a whole. In 1939, aviation was ranked
as the 46th largest industry in the country. By 1943, it had become the largest
industry in the world. Its importance in world commerce and the conduct of
the war cannot be overstated.
Aviation suddenly captured the interest of both the American people and
the military establishment. For the first time, countless thousands of individuals
flew either commercially or on military transports. The military services used
aircraft both for fighting the war and for transporting troops and materials.
World War II also caused a tremendous increase in the CAA’s operating budget. It was this increased funding that enabled the CAA to take over the operation of most of the nation’s control towers. Additional funds were granted to
develop emergency landing areas for military aircraft. Unfortunately, research
and development on future civilian air traffic control and navigational systems
virtually halted to pursue the immediate needs of the war effort.
The war also had some harmful effects on civilian aviation. By emergency
order, civilian flying was all but banned along the American coasts, and inland
flyers were required to comply with additional restrictions. Aircraft fuel was
either rationed or cut off completely. Military aircraft soon made up the bulk
of the flights operating in the nation’s airways. In 1940, only 30 percent of IFR
flights were military; by 1943, this figure had increased to 85 percent. The U.S.
Army, which was the arm of the military most involved in aviation, began to
draft CAA controllers to operate their own ATC facilities. The Army also began
to requisition civilian airliners to use as military transport aircraft.
Since the vast majority of the flights around the country were now military, the Army expressed a desire to appropriate and operate the air traffic control system for the duration of the war. CAA officials adamantly opposed this
move, surmising that it would be difficult, if not impossible, to wrest control
of the system away from the Army at the conclusion of the war. In an attempt
to defuse and define the situation, on December 12, 1941, President Roosevelt
signed Executive Order 8974, which stated:
In the administration of the statutes relating to civil aviation the Secretary of
Commerce is directed to exercise his control and jurisdiction over civil aviation
in accordance with requirements for the successful prosecution of the war, as
may be required by the Secretary of War.
The Secretary of War is authorized and directed to take possession and
assure control of the civil aviation system, or systems, or any part thereof, to
the extent necessary for the successful prosecution of the war.

Various factions in the U.S. Army recommended that the secretary of war invoke
the provisions of paragraph 2 of the executive order to completely militarize
the CAA. CAA administrators insisted, however, that they were best equipped
to operate a system to separate both civilian and military aircraft. The CAA

18 / CHAPTER 1
opinion prevailed, and an uneasy truce resulted, although many factions in the
Army continued to press for a full military takeover of the ATC system.
The Interdepartmental Air Traffic Control Board (IATCB) was formed
on April 7, 1941, to coordinate activities between the CAA and the various
military services. This board remained in existence until 1946. During the war,
the CAA established approach control facilities at the busiest air traffic control towers. Instead of simply handling takeoffs and landings, the approach
controllers assumed responsibility for separating arriving or departing aircraft
out to a distance of about 15 to 20 miles. This reduced the burden on the controllers working at the air traffic control centers and allowed tower controllers to more easily sequence arriving and departing aircraft into the local traffic
pattern.
During 1942, the CAA established interstate airway communication stations (INSACSs) that were strategically placed to offer flight advisory services
to aircraft operating along the federal airways. The INSACs were staffed by air
traffic controllers who communicated directly with pilots by radio and passed
along weather information and instructions from the controllers working at the
ATCCs. As these INSACSs were completed, it was no longer necessary to use
airline radio operators to relay instructions from the controller to the pilots.
The INSACSs were able to accept position reports from the pilots and relay
these reports to the centers. Eventually, the INSACSs began to offer preflight
weather briefings by telephone and to file flight plans for pilots. The INSACSs
were the precursors to the flight service stations (FSSs) operated by the federal
government today.
Civilian
versus
Military Air
Trafﬁc
Control

The U.S. Army was still dissatisfied with the decision authorizing the CAA as
the primary agency responsible for both civilian and military air traffic control.
On May 13, 1943, in a bid to reduce the CAA’s control of military traffic, the
Army began to staff the ATCCs with military air traffic controllers. These controllers assumed the responsibility for tracking Army aircraft but did not usurp
the CAA controllers when separating these aircraft. The Army was not satisfied
with this limited control, however, and in January 1944 set up 23 flight control
centers of its own. These military air traffic control centers paralleled those of
the CAA but were responsible for separating military aircraft.
As World War II drew to a close in the mid-1940s, the pent-up growth of
civil aviation around the world exploded, creating a need for further air traffic
control equipment and personnel. In 1945 the Provisional International Civil
Aviation Organization (PICAO) was formed in an attempt to coordinate this
growth. This organization was superseded by the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO) in 1947. ICAO eventually accepted the U.S. navigation
and communication system as the worldwide standard for air traffic control.
In addition, ICAO selected English to be the common language of air traffic
control worldwide (see Figure 1–7).
In an attempt to plan for the nation’s growth in aviation, the Air
Coordinating Committee (ACC) was established on March 27, 1945. By
interdepartmental agreement, the ACC was staffed by members of the State

/

19

FAA

History of Air Trafﬁc Control

Figure 1–7. Controllers in the tower at the Chicago Midway Airport in 1946.

Department, CAA, War Department, Post Office Department, and Bureau of
the Budget. The ACC’s primary responsibilities were to coordinate with ICAO
and to make recommendations on technical, economic, and industrial matters
relating to aviation. In 1945 the ACC absorbed the responsibilities of the Interdepartmental Air Traffic Control Board. The ACC received formal status when
President Harry Truman signed Executive Order 9781.

1945–1955
RTCA Special
Committee
31 Report

On March 1, 1947, the ACC requested that the Radio Technical Commission
for Aeronautics (RTCA) form a task force to try to predict the future needs of
the nation’s air traffic control system. The RTCA was composed of members
from the State Department, War Department, Coast Guard, Federal Communications Commission, and CAA. The RTCA formed Special Committee 31
(SC-31), which completed its final report on May 12, 1948.
The SC-31 report recommended that a common air traffic control system
be developed that would serve the needs of both military and civilian pilots.

20 / CHAPTER 1
The committee avoided recommending the development of any unusual technical equipment and insisted that any additions to the air traffic control system
meet the following requirements:
1. The new system must permit aircraft to be flown safely.
2. It must improve the flow of air traffic.
3. Any airborne equipment must be both simple and lightweight.
4. Any new system must impose a minimum burden on the pilot or ground
personnel.
5. The installed equipment must require a minimum of funding from either
taxpayers, airlines, or private pilots.

To meet these requirements, the report recommended that a common navigation system be developed around the newly designed VHF omnidirectional
range (VOR) and distance measuring equipment (DME). The report also recommended that airport surveillance radar (ASR) be installed at busy airports
and at air traffic control centers. It was recommended that a lightweight transponder be developed that could be installed on aircraft and provide altitude
and identification information to ground-based radar. Finally, the report recommended that the newly designed instrument landing system (ILS) be installed in
conjunction with precision approach radar (PAR) to improve the capabilities of
aircraft attempting to land in poor weather conditions. (A detailed explanation
of all of this equipment is provided in the following chapters.) In 1948, the Air
Navigation Development Board (ANDB) was formed to oversee the implementation of the ATC system described in SC-31.
Although the SC-31 report was hailed as a milestone in air traffic control development, a number of immediate problems surfaced. With the federal
budgetary restraints due to expenditures during the war still in place, Congress
found itself both unable and unwilling to appropriate the funds necessary to
expand the needed air traffic control services. At the same time, the military
began to pursue the development of an incompatible navigation system known
as tactical air navigation (TACAN). In addition, the military services preferred
the sole utilization of precision approach radar instead of the instrument landing system. In general, however, the SC-31 report laid the groundwork for the
development of the next-generation air traffic control system.
Air Trafﬁc
Congestion

As the 1940s drew to a close, the air traffic control system, rooted to procedures
developed in the early 1930s, could no longer handle the tremendous numbers
of aircraft using it. Even then, center controllers were still tracking and separating aircraft by writing their approximate positions on paper strips and moving
shrimp boats along a map. Because of the inaccuracies inherent in this system,
controllers were required to separate aircraft by at least 10 minutes. At the
typical cruising speeds of aircraft in use in the 1940s, this meant that aircraft
were being separated by between 50 and 100 miles. This procedure resulted in
an excessive amount of airspace being assigned to each aircraft. There was

History of Air Trafﬁc Control

/

21

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

simply not adequate airspace available to allocate every aircraft 50 to
100 miles. Controllers had no option on busy days other than to hold aircraft
in flight or delay their departure until sufficient airspace was available (see
Figure 1–8).
Whenever traffic delays became excessive and VFR flight conditions
existed, many pilots chose to operate under VFR flight rules. These rules
required that pilots see and avoid other aircraft within their immediate vicinity.
But during extended periods of marginal weather, every pilot who wished to fly
on a federal airway needed a clearance from air traffic control. This application
of separation to every aircraft extended the air traffic control system beyond its
capacity and forced air traffic controllers to limit access to the nation’s airways.
Most pilots chose to accept this delay, but others departed and operated IFR in
uncontrolled airspace. Since the CAA did not regulate flights in uncontrolled
airspace, these pilots would not experience any delays. But no separation service was offered to these pilots, and they could only hope that no other aircraft
were within their immediate vicinity.
When certain areas, such as New York or Chicago, experienced poor
weather conditions, the resulting delays rippled throughout the ATC system,
affecting traffic as far as 1,000 miles away. As more and more airlines began to
operate, and with over 5,000 private aircraft being added to the general aviation
fleet every year, the air traffic control system was rapidly becoming critically
overloaded. This overload reached epic proportions in the middle of the 1950s.
When inclement weather approached the New York City area on September 15,

22 / CHAPTER 1
1954, air traffic controllers were confronted with a record number of pilots
filing instrument flight plans. Airliners and private aircraft along the eastern seaboard of the United States were delayed for hours before they could be allowed
to depart toward their destinations. On that day, called “Black Wednesday” by
New York City residents, over 45,000 airline passengers and hundreds of private aircraft were substantially delayed because of traffic congestion.
As air traffic continued to increase during the decade, even clear weather
in the major metropolitan areas of the country could not totally prevent delays.
As the military began to introduce jet-powered fighter aircraft, and the airlines introduced into service bigger, faster, and higher flying airliners, many
pilots realized that it would soon be impossible to avoid other aircraft using the
“see-and-be-seen” VFR rules of traffic avoidance. Two pilots approaching each
other at 500 miles per hour might have less than 10 seconds to locate one another,
evaluate the potential traffic conflict, and take corrective action. Subsequently,
even during periods of VFR weather, an increasing number of pilots chose to
file IFR flight plans to ensure air traffic separation. This practice decreased the
chance of a midair collision between two aircraft operating on IFR flight plans
but did not eliminate the risk of collision with an aircraft operating under VFR
flight rules. When operating in VFR conditions, pilots on IFR flight plans were
still required to see and avoid other aircraft that could be flying VFR.
As the demand on the air traffic control system increased, both pilots and
controllers realized that it would only be a matter of time until the ATC system
became completely saturated and traffic came to a standstill around major
airports and airways.

1955–1965
Implementation of Radar

Even though the SC-31 report of 1948 recommended the installation of radar
to assist controllers to separate aircraft, it was not until the late 1950s that a
civilian radar system was installed by the CAA. Although radar had been developed and perfected during World War II, early radars were designed to detect
incoming aircraft and direct interceptors to their location. This was a much
different task from trying to use radar to separate aircraft. In 1949, the U.S. Air
Force had begun to develop a computerized radar defense system known as
SAGE, an acronym for semiautomated ground environment. This system used
multiple radar sites to display all the aircraft within a designated area on a
radar screen, making it possible for military controllers to vector air defense
fighters toward invading enemy aircraft. By the early 1950s, millions of dollars
had been spent by the Department of Defense to develop this system. But by
the time the SAGE system became operational, the Air Force recognized that it
might not be needed since intercontinental ballistic missiles were beginning to
replace the long-range bombers that the SAGE system was designed to detect.
The Air Force recommended to the president that since the SAGE system was already operational, and since Air Force controllers were already

History of Air Trafﬁc Control

/

23

experienced in operating the equipment, military controllers be authorized to
use SAGE to separate high-altitude aircraft. At the very least, they recommended
that the CAA purchase and use the SAGE system for air traffic control. The
CAA in turn recommended that the air traffic control centers be equipped with
new radar systems expressly designed for locating, tracking, and separating
high-altitude aircraft. The CAA felt that the SAGE system was not satisfactorily
suited to the separation of aircraft and felt that a new radar system should be
designed strictly for that purpose. The inevitable squabbling over which system
should be installed ended with the president authorizing the CAA to develop a
nationwide civilian system of air traffic control radar (see Figure 1–9).
In 1956, the first air route surveillance radar (ARSR)was purchased by the
CAA for use in the air traffic control centers. Also that year the first air traffic
control computer was installed at Indianapolis Center. Research and development began on a secondary radar system that would use a transponder in
each aircraft to display the aircraft’s identification and altitude on the controller’s radar screen. In 1957, this system was experimentally implemented and is
known as the air traffic control radar beacon system (ATCRBS). This system is
fully described in Chapter 8.
Budget
Cutbacks

FAA

During the 1950s, the CAA’s budget requests were routinely reduced because
of more politically pressing problems. From 1950 to 1954, the CAA’s budget

Figure 1–9. Controllers using radar and shrimp boats to control traffic circa 1960.

24 / CHAPTER 1
decreased from $187 million to $116 million per year. The budget for airway
facilities development and acquisition was slashed from $37 million a year to
just $7 million a year.
It soon became obvious that the CAA could not effectively improve the
nation’s air traffic control system with these shrinking appropriations. In fact,
it would prove to be almost impossible to maintain the current, outmoded air
traffic control system at such a reduced funding level. As appropriations were
cut, research and development on advanced radar and computer systems had
to be postponed, and even routine maintenance on navigation and air traffic
control equipment was reduced to a minimum.
The budget cuts of the 1950s made it impossible for the CAA to implement
many of the programs designed to increase the safety and efficiency of the air
traffic control system. The implementation of additional air route surveillance
radars for the air traffic control centers was delayed, along with the establishment
of additional air traffic control towers. The CAA did, however, recommend that
many of the INSACSs be closed. Since the centers had eventually been equipped
with remote radio transmitters and receivers that permitted direct pilot-tocontroller communication, the INSACSs were no longer needed to relay clearances and position reports. This move to reduce expenditures by the CAA during an extremely meager funding period was immediately met with opposition
from both Congress and the affected local communities. Although the INSACSs
were not particularly large, in a small city where one might be located the loss
of even a few federal jobs was perceived as a tremendous blow. Congressional
pressure forced the CAA to withdraw the INSACSs closing plan. This further
depleted the funds available to the CAA for air traffic control modernization.
The congressional short sightedness that had reduced the CAA’s research
and development program forced the CAA to delay implementing many of
the SC-31 recommendations. Because of insufficient funding, by 1954 only
47 percent of the “interim” SC-31 plan had been completed. The target date
for completion of the entire program had been 1953. Now, at the current
rate of progress, it was calculated that the SC-31 recommendations would be
completed in the year 2014! Soon the nation would regret this lack of legislative foresight.
The Question
of Airway
Safety

On Saturday, June 30, 1956, one of a series of major aircraft accidents occurred
that made the American public regret the low priority Congress had given air
traffic control funding. This midair collision finally persuaded legislators to
embark on a massive ATC modernization plan. At 9:01 a.m. TWA Flight 2, a
Lockheed Super Constellation, departed the Los Angeles Airport en route to
Kansas City, St. Louis, and Washington, D.C. At 9:04 a.m., United Airlines
Flight 718 left Los Angeles for Chicago. Both aircraft were initially assigned the
same route, with the TWA aircraft climbing to 19,000 feet and the United aircraft climbing to 21,000 feet. At about 10:00 a.m., the TWA flight encountered
some air turbulence and the pilots requested a higher cruising altitude. The air
traffic controller assigned TWA Flight 2 a cruising altitude of 20,000 feet. Since
the established federal airway was not the most direct route from Los Angeles

History of Air Trafﬁc Control

/

25

to Chicago, the pilots of both aircraft eventually requested that they be allowed
to alter their route of flight, leaving the airway and entering uncontrolled airspace, to provide a scenic view of the Grand Canyon to their passengers.
During VFR weather conditions, it was not uncommon for pilots to
request permission to deviate from the airways and take “short cuts” to their
destination. Air traffic controllers routinely approved this route deviation, and
the pilots realized that the controllers would no longer provide separation services. It then became necessary for the pilots to operate under VFR flight rules
and provide their own separation from other aircraft. When the pilots of both
the TWA and United aircraft failed to make any additional position reports, an
intensive ground and air search was begun. The wreckage of the two aircraft
was eventually found scattered in a remote gorge in the Grand Canyon. The aircraft had collided in midair, killing over 120 people. There were no survivors.
The American public was both shocked and outraged to hear that two
modern, sophisticated aircraft flying in near perfect weather conditions had
collided in midair. During the ensuing investigation, the CAA publicly denied
responsibility for the collision, since the pilots of both aircraft had requested
permission to fly in uncontrolled airspace and were responsible for their own
safety and separation. But it soon became obvious that the CAA did not have
enough airways, airspace, or controllers to be able to offer positive separation
to every aircraft trying to fly across the country. Additional airways had not
been developed due to insufficient funding during the previous decade. The
CAA had not been able to purchase sufficient radio navigation aids or hire
sufficient air traffic controllers to properly separate air traffic over much of the
continental United States.
In reality, it was not the CAA’s fault, but that of Congress, which had
refused to appropriate sufficient funds to operate the ATC system. Shortly after
the investigation of this accident, the CAA requested a $250 million appropriation from Congress to upgrade the airway system. These funds were used to
purchase sufficient radar surveillance equipment to permit air traffic controllers
to monitor and separate all the traffic operating above 18,000 feet. The CAA
also requested funding to almost double the available navigation aids and to
open 40 new control towers. In addition, the CAA was permitted to hire 1,400
more air traffic controllers. In 1956, the first 23 air route surveillance radars
(ARSRs) were ordered. The CAA stated that an additional 50 to 60 ARSRs
were needed to provide radar coverage over the entire continental United States
but agreed to use as many Air Force defense radars as possible to minimize the
acquisition cost. Congress immediately approved this funding request. Eventually, radar surveillance and positive control of high-altitude aircraft would
be implemented and would greatly improve the airway safety record in the
coming decades.
Creation of
the Federal
Aviation
Agency

In 1957 the CAA announced a plan to have a scaled-down version of the SC-31
recommendations implemented by 1962—9 years later than the original estimate for the full implementation. Unfortunately, by this time many of the recommendations made in SC-31 were already obsolete. When the report had first

26 / CHAPTER 1
been commissioned in 1948, turbine-powered airliners were only a gleam in
some engineer’s eye. No one predicted that by 1957 one British and two American jet aircraft would be nearing production. The current, underfunded air traffic
control system was not ready for this influx of high-flying passenger aircraft.
An independent Airways Modernization Board (AMB) was formed in
1957 to coordinate civilian-military aviation electronics research and development. The AMB immediately began to conduct research on air traffic control
computers, transponders, and advanced radar equipment. In 1958 the AMB
opened its own research and development facilities separate from those of the
CAA. Located in Atlantic City, New Jersey, this complex became known as
the National Aviation Facilities Experimental Center (NAFEC). As research
activity rapidly increased and funding was diverted to NAFEC, the CAA was
eventually forced to close its own Technical Evaluation and Development Center in Indianapolis.
Unfortunately, this sudden increase in funding did little to immediately
improve the capabilities and operation of the ATC system. Woefully underfunded for the previous two decades, the system could not be brought up to
speed in such a short time. The air traffic controllers had been frustrated by
their working conditions and compensation for years, and this new promise of
future equipment and increased funding rang hollow in their ears. They had
seen the recommendations of SC-31 dragged out for years and had no reason
to believe that it might be any different this time around.
For these and many other reasons, air traffic controllers began to leave the
profession at an ever-increasing rate. Some left because of overwork, and others
left because of the generally low pay. In some centers, as many as 30 percent of
the controllers tendered their resignation in 1957 alone. This high attrition rate
made it even harder for the CAA to increase the controller complement. Where
previously the CAA had to hire about 50 controllers per month, it now had to
try to hire over 400 quality recruits per month just to keep up with the replacement of controllers who were leaving the profession. By 1957, because of a
lack of experienced controllers, most center controllers were working 6 days a
week, 8 hours a day with no breaks. Often they might be required to work 60
to 70 days in a row with little time off. In response to this pressure, a group of
discontented controllers formed the Air Traffic Control Association (ATCA)
to assert controllers’ demands for increased pay and improved working conditions. By 1960 this group boasted over 9,000 members.
In an attempt to improve safety, in 1957 the CAA designated all of the
airspace above 24,000 feet as controlled airspace. This milestone development
improved the separation of high-altitude airline flights operating IFR but did
nothing to separate them from military or private aircraft that chose to fly in
this airspace under VFR flight rules. As the CAA debated the wisdom of requiring IFR flight plans of any aircraft operating above 24,000 feet, a number of
accidents occurred that would force the hand of the CAA.
On April 21, 1958, an Air Force jet collided with a United Airlines
DC-7 at 21,000 feet near Las Vegas. The fighter had been descending toward
Nellis Air Force Base under VFR conditions. Both of the fighter pilots and

History of Air Trafﬁc Control

/

27

47 persons on the DC-7 died in that accident. In less than a month, another accident occurred near Brunswick, Maryland. An Air National Guard jet operating
VFR collided with a Capital Airlines turboprop, killing 12 people. Although
many congressmen called for the immediate implementation of positive control
of every aircraft operating at high altitude, it was apparent that the CAA did
not have the capacity to do so. Positive control requires that every aircraft be
actively separated by the air traffic control system. To positively separate every
aircraft operating above 18,000 feet would mean an immediate and substantial
influx of personnel and equipment.
In 1956, President Dwight D. Eisenhower selected Edward Curtis, a Kodak
vice president and Army Air Corps major general, to direct a long-range study
of the nation’s aviation system. Curtis and his staff took this responsibility
seriously and prepared an extensive report for the president in 1957. The committee recommended that in the interim the Airways Modernization Board be
given the task of consolidating the government’s efforts in aviation research and
development. The eventual goal of the AMB was to design a common air traffic
control system that would serve the needs of both military and civilian aircraft.
Curtis also recommended the permanent formation of an independent agency
that would absorb the functions of the CAA and eventually those of the AMB.
This new agency would be known as the Federal Aviation Agency (FAA).
It took 2 years to shepherd the appropriate legislation through Congress,
but with the backing of Senators Mike Monroney of Oklahoma and Warren
Magnuson of Washington, the Federal Aviation Agency was created by act of
Congress and began operation on December 31, 1958. This new federal agency
was administered by a cabinet-level officer who was appointed by and directly
responsible to the president of the United States. No longer would the air traffic
control system be handicapped because of bureaucratic infighting within the
Department of Commerce. The new FAA would receive its funding directly from
Congress, and the FAA administrator would report personally to the president.
The employees of the newly created FAA faced an enormous task. The
air traffic control system had been undermanned and underfunded for over
20 years. Although impressive safety measures had been taken to separate highflying airliners, the low altitudes in the immediate vicinity of the major terminals were still congested, a major source of traffic delays. High-speed military
aircraft and low-speed private aircraft were flying in VFR conditions within
the vicinity of the nation’s major airports while an ever-increasing number of
commercial airline flights were attempting to use the same airspace. During
the 1950s, few innovative procedures had been developed and sufficient radar
surveillance equipment had not been installed by the CAA. Numerous near collisions were being reported each year by both pilots and controllers. A major
accident around an airport seemed inevitable.
The New
York City
Disaster

Just as the new FAA was in the process of getting organized, disaster struck. On
December 16, 1960, a United Airlines DC-8 and a TWA Super Constellation
collided over New York City. One hundred twenty-eight people on board the
two aircraft died, as did eight people on the ground. The accident pointed out

28 / CHAPTER 1
many of the difficulties the FAA still faced. The ensuing investigation revealed
that both of the aircraft were on IFR flight plans and both were in contact with
the appropriate air traffic control facilities. The inquiry also revealed that the
United Airlines aircraft had experienced partial navigation receiver failure, but
the pilots had not informed the air traffic controller of the malfunction. The
United aircraft had been cleared to enter a holding pattern, pending clearance
to land at New York’s Idlewild Airport (now John F. Kennedy International
Airport). The pilots of this aircraft were then advised to contact the tower controllers at Idlewild.
At the same time, the TWA Super Constellation had been placed in a
holding pattern awaiting clearance to land at New York’s La Guardia Airport.
The pilots of the TWA aircraft were in communication with the tower controllers at La Guardia. Both of the aircraft had been assigned the same altitude but
were assigned to two different holding patterns that were safely separated. The
pilots of the United Airlines aircraft entered their assigned holding pattern at an
excessive airspeed and flew outside the confines of their designated holding pattern airspace. As a result, they strayed into the airspace reserved for the TWA
flight and eventually collided with it. The investigation determined that proper
procedures had been applied by the controllers in the two control towers and
placed the blame for the accident on the pilots of the United aircraft.
The investigators determined that the United pilots had used improper
procedures while entering the holding pattern and should have advised the
controllers of their navigation receiver problems. The accident report did mention, however, that had the control towers been equipped with surveillance
radar, the air traffic controllers might have detected the impending collision
and issued corrective instructions to one or both of the aircraft. This realization hastened the installation of radar equipment at busy airports and led to
the eventual establishment of the New York approach control facility (known
as the Common IFR Room) that would be equipped with radar and would be
responsible for the separation of all aircraft inbound to the New York metropolitan area.
Project
Beacon

The air traffic control system in the United States had been constructed haphazardly in response to situations instead of in anticipation of them. In an
attempt to rectify this, President Kennedy issued an order on March 8, 1961,
requesting the FAA to “conduct a scientific, engineering overview of our aviation facilities and related research and development and to prepare a practicable long-range plan to insure efficient and safe control of all air traffic within
the United States.” A task force was created by the Federal Aviation Agency to
carry out the wishes of the president and to report its findings to the FAA
administrator. This task force was to investigate the current air traffic control
system and make recommendations for improving it. The task force was known
as Project Beacon.
After close to a year of investigating the current and planned improvements to the nation’s air traffic control system, the Project Beacon task force
issued its final report. The report stated that although the FAA had many

History of Air Trafﬁc Control

/

29

projects in development, no overall direction or coordination seemed to guide
these projects. Much of the FAA’s research was still based on the SC-31 report,
which was almost 20 years old. The task force found that much of the research
and development work was focusing on technically advanced equipment, while
very little work was being done on short-range problems that needed immediate attention. FAA research personnel were working to develop advanced air
traffic control computers and three-dimensional radar, while controllers in the
field were complaining that the current radar system was unsuitable.
The Project Beacon task force essentially agreed with the controllers that
before an advanced computerized air traffic control system was developed,
the current radar equipment would have to be modernized and improved. The
task force report recommended that the FAA install sufficient radar surveillance equipment across the country to permit air traffic controllers to maintain
continuous radar monitoring of aircraft from takeoff to landing. The Project
Beacon report also stressed the use of secondary radar and transponders to
assist controllers in identifying each aircraft and determining its altitude.
The task force also recommended that computer processing equipment be
installed at air traffic facilities to assist controllers with their clerical duties and
to help them more readily interpret radar information. In the early 1960s, controllers were hand printing flight progress strips and passing along information
to other controllers using teletypes and party-line telephone circuits. The task
force recommended that the FAA develop a computerized flight information
system that would automatically print out flight progress strips and continuously distribute updated flight information. This system would be designed to
permit air traffic controllers to communicate with each other and pass along
essential flight information without using the telephone. The system was ultimately developed by the FAA and is known as the flight data processing (FDP)
system.
The Project Beacon task force also recommended that a computer-driven
display system be developed that would show the aircraft’s identification, altitude, and airspeed directly on the radar scope. Placing this information directly
on the radar display would help eliminate the confusion when controllers try
to identify each blip on the radar screen and correlate this information with
that contained on the plastic shrimp boats and on the flight progress strips. The
computer would be designed so that it could be custom programmed to compute and predict the future flight path of each aircraft and advise the controller
if two aircraft were going to approach too close to each other or descend too
close to the ground. In addition, when an aircraft neared the boundary of a
controller’s area of responsibility, the computer would ensure that the aircraft’s
identification would begin to flash on the next controller’s radar screen; with
the push of a button, the next controller would take responsibility for the aircraft’s separation (see Figure 1–10).
Although a common system was envisioned, because of the different
requirements of the center and terminal controllers, two distinctly different
computerized radar systems were eventually developed. The system used in
the air route traffic control centers (ARTCCs) is called radar data processing

FAA

30 / CHAPTER 1

Figure 1–10. Controllers in the tower cab at the Washington Dulles Airport in 1963.

(RDP), whereas the system used in the control towers and approach controls
is called the automated radar terminal system (ARTS). These two systems are
described in detail in Chapter 8.
Controller
Unionization

In the early 1960s, labor unrest began to appear again within the FAA. Air
traffic controllers, who had endured years of low salaries and unpleasant working conditions, began to earnestly embrace professional associations to represent them. The Air Traffic Control Association was the first of many that
represented various groups of air traffic controllers. These professional associations differed from trade unions in that they spoke out on the controllers’
behalf and lobbied for ATC system improvements but refrained from collective
bargaining and other typical union activities.
In 1961 President Kennedy signed Executive Order 10988, which gave
trade unions the right to represent air traffic controllers. The executive order
made no distinction between professional associations and trade unions.
Within a matter of years, various associations began to organize the controller
work force. These organizations included ATCA, the National Association of
Government Employees (NAGE), and the National Association of Air Traffic
Specialists (NAATS).
The FAA faced a distinctive problem in that it was one of the few federal
agencies whose operation was vital to the well-being of the country but whose

History of Air Trafﬁc Control

/

31

work force was permitted to become unionized. Although strikes were illegal
for federal employees, it was felt that the possibility existed for disruptive labor
activity if this situation was allowed to endure. The FAA administrator at the
time, Najeeb Halaby, proposed that this problem be solved through the formation of a semimilitary organization known as the Federal Air Service (FAS).
Under this plan, every controller would be a member of the FAS, which would
be a group similar to the U.S. Coast Guard. Although remaining technically
civilian, this group of federal employees would be subject to military induction
during times of national crisis. The new organization would be considered vital
to the national defense and as such would not be permitted to be unionized
under the president’s executive order.
This proposal drew immediate and vociferous opposition from both controllers and members of Congress. After years of attempting to pry aviation
control away from the military, they saw the FAS as an opening that might lead
to further military control of aviation. Congressional hearings determined that
this organization was unnecessary and actually more expensive than the current system. By 1963, the Federal Air Service concept was no longer being seriously considered. Although highly disliked, the concept did attempt to define
the role of the FAA in a national emergency. In 1964, President Johnson signed
Executive Order 11161, which directed the FAA administrator and the secretary of defense to draw up plans whereby the FAA would be absorbed by the
Defense Department in times of national emergency.
Public discussion did little to pacify the working controllers. Frustration
was reaching a peak, and the controllers were becoming increasingly militant.
Most felt that FAA management had been inattentive to their concerns. The controllers were generally dissatisfied with both of the major associations (ATCA
and NAGE) that were attempting to represent them. Many felt that ATCA
would not effectively press the issues that were important to them. NAGE,
on the other hand, represented many different types of government employees, which disappointed many controllers who were still proud to be part of
an elite government group. A group of New York–area controllers eventually
formed an association in an attempt to better represent their special interests.
After an accidental meeting between one of the group and well-known attorney
F. Lee Bailey, he helped them create a new national controllers’ organization,
the Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization (PATCO). PATCO was
run by controllers with membership limited to controllers. In a short time,
PATCO became one of the most militant and vocal controller organizations. It
would play a large part in future FAA–labor relations.

1965–1981
Department
of Transportation

During the Johnson administration in the 1960s, the consensus in the federal
government was that as the government became more involved in transportation issues, every transportation function of the government should reside in

32 / CHAPTER 1
one cabinet-level agency. This arrangement would theoretically make it easier
for overall transportation policy to be developed and implemented. It had
become apparent during the construction of major airports around the country
that no one form of transportation was completely independent of the others.
For instance, in many cities, modern and expensive airports had been constructed but were wasting away for want of decent ground access to the airport.
Millions of dollars were being wasted on federally sponsored projects because
of a lack of overall direction.
This cabinet-level coordinating agency became a reality on April 1, 1967,
when the Department of Transportation (DOT) was created by Congress. The
Federal Aviation Agency was merged into the DOT, with its stature and administrator downgraded. The initials FAA now stood for Federal Aviation Administration, a part (albeit the largest part) of the Department of Transportation. The
FAA administrator would no longer report directly to the president but would
instead report to the secretary of transportation. New programs and budget
requests would have to be approved by the DOT, which would then include
these requests in the DOT’s overall budget and submit it to the president.
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) was also created on
this date. The NTSB was charged with investigating and determining the cause
of transportation accidents and making recommendations to the secretary of
transportation. The Civil Aeronautics Board was merged into the DOT, with its
responsibilities limited to the regulation of commercial airline routes and fares.
With this new organization in place, the FAA administrator would have
to learn to operate within the growing bureaucracy of the Department of Transportation. No longer could the administrator make direct appeals to the president or Congress. The FAA became part of a larger organization that included
the Federal Highway Administration, the Federal Railroad Administration, the
Coast Guard, and the Saint Lawrence Seaway Commission.
Continued
Labor Unrest

As the 1960s drew to a close, airports around the country were becoming
increasingly congested, and delays were skyrocketing. A number of midair collisions around major airports had shaken the public’s confidence in the air
traffic control system. Because of increased defense spending to fund the conflict
in Vietnam, the FAA’s budget was constantly being reduced. The equipment
recommended by the Project Beacon task force was being installed, but at a
much slower pace than originally planned. The air traffic controllers working
in the towers and the centers were becoming increasingly irritated with delays
in equipment acquisition and blamed FAA mismanagement for their problems.
The FAA was forced to spend most of its shrinking appropriations on simply
maintaining the current air traffic control system, not improving it.
The FAA had to stretch out major equipment procurement programs
and even temporarily closed the controller training school in Oklahoma City.
This was a critical time for training in the FAA. Many of the controllers who
had been hired in the 1940s were retiring, while few new controllers were
being hired to replace them. As air traffic continued to increase, the FAA’s

History of Air Trafﬁc Control

/

33

management relationship with the controllers continued to worsen. PATCO
spokesmen asserted that both the FAA and the DOT were unnecessarily delaying the installation of sufficient air traffic control equipment. The union charged
that the FAA was not hiring enough new air traffic controllers to properly and
safely operate the nation’s air traffic control system.
On July 3, 1968, PATCO flexed its muscles by announcing “Operation
Air Safety,” which ordered member controllers to strictly adhere to established
separation standards for aircraft. The resultant delay of traffic was the first
of many official and unofficial “slowdowns” that the union was to initiate. In
1969, the U.S. Civil Service Commission ruled that PATCO was no longer a
professional association but was in fact a trade union. The controllers’ disaffection with the FAA reached a critical point on March 25, 1970, when the
newly designated union orchestrated a controller sick-out. To protest many of
the FAA actions that they felt were unfair, over 2,000 controllers around the
country did not report to work as scheduled and informed management that
they were ill. Management personnel were required to assume many of the
duties of the missing controllers. With traffic around the country delayed for
hours, the union and FAA management came to an agreement that returned
most of the controllers to work. After fierce negotiations and court battles, the
FAA agreed to hire back most of the “sick” controllers, and the union agreed
never to sponsor an illegal strike.
During the controller sick-out, it became apparent that the ATC system
was operating nearly at capacity. It had become necessary to reroute or delay
hundreds of IFR flights in order to reduce the traffic congestion over the busiest areas of the country. The FAA requested, and Congress appropriated, additional funds to accelerate the installation of many of the automated systems
recommended by the Project Beacon task force. Even with this additional funding, the FAA was still years behind the planned schedule for automation. In
addition, the FAA reopened the training academy in Oklahoma City and began
to hire air traffic controllers at an increasing rate. Salaries were increased to
help attract and retain controllers. During the 1970s, the FAA made steady
progress toward the goal of automating many of the functions of the ATC
system. But it would prove to be impossible to make up for the lack of funding
the FAA had experienced in the 1960s.
Airline
Deregulation

In 1978, the Airline Deregulation Act was enacted by the Carter administration.
This act greatly reduced the influence of the Civil Aeronautics Board and provided for its eventual dissolution. Prior to ratification of the Deregulation
Act, the airlines were required to petition the CAB for any route addition, deletion, or change. In addition, the fare structure for airline flights had been highly
regulated by the CAB. With the passage of the Deregulation Act, the airlines
were free to determine their own fares and route structures without government
approval. This forced the airline industry to compete for passengers as never
before. New airlines were formed in record time and soon began to operate in

34 / CHAPTER 1
direct competition with older, more established airlines. In response to this competitive threat, the established airlines reevaluated their markets and began to
overhaul their route structures, all without the government approval that had
been needed prior to deregulation. As a result of this new competition among
airlines, fares were reduced to all-time lows while record numbers of travelers
chose to travel by air.
The Deregulation Act of 1978 disrupted this nation’s air traffic control
system in ways never foreseen by its architects. Air traffic activity increased
at rates that had been impossible to predict. Airport activity increased faster
than new controllers could be trained or new equipment could be moved to
adapt to the changing traffic flows. Many of the major airlines adopted “huband-spoke" route systems that threatened to overwhelm the air traffic control
system at some airports. A hub-and-spoke system eliminates many nonstop
direct routes and designates one airport to act as the “hub” airport for the
region. Flights depart other airports in the area and converge on the hub airport
at approximately the same time. Most of the passengers disembark from their
flights and are shuttled to another aircraft that will fly them to their destination. When all of the passengers have boarded the proper aircraft, the airliners
depart. Since all of the aircraft arrive or depart at approximately the same time,
this creates a tremendous but transient strain on the ATC system.
Many of the airlines chose to locate their hubs at airports that were illequipped to handle this tremendous growth in traffic. The affected ATC facilities were required to have sufficient controllers and ATC equipment in place to
handle the enormous but momentary peaks in air traffic throughout the day.
The FAA was unable to quickly adapt the air traffic control system to meet this
tremendous increase in air traffic. Controllers could not be trained nor could
equipment be installed quickly enough to meet the new demands on the ATC
system (see Figure 1–11).
Controllers’
Strike of
1981

During the 1970s, FAA management had caved in to a number of PATCO
demands. The union had requested and received sole representation rights for
controllers in the towers and centers, an early retirement program, a medical
disability program, airline familiarization flights, and a number of changes in
the compensation rules. The one item that PATCO wanted but was never able
to get was the release of air traffic controllers from the Civil Service System. As
long as controllers were considered Civil Service employees, any change in
controller working conditions also affected federal employees nationwide.
PATCO looked to the Postal Service, which was an independent agency born
of the illegal strike by postal workers in the early 1970s, as a role model.
After a bitter internal fight, a more militant faction of controllers took
charge of PATCO in early 1981. This group advocated a showdown with the
FAA to finally force the issue. Despite being warned by the FAA, Congress, and
the president, PATCO staged an illegal strike on August 3, 1981. Two days
later, after the controllers disregarded a presidential ultimatum to return to
work, their employment was terminated by the FAA. Over 10,000 controllers
participated in this illegal job action and were fired.

/

35

FAA

History of Air Trafﬁc Control

Figure 1–11. Controllers in the Long Island (New York) tower in 1986.

In the wake of the strike and the mass firings, the FAA was faced with the
enormous task of hiring and training enough controllers to replace those who
had been fired. Since it takes at least 3 years in normal conditions to train a new
controller, temporary flight restrictions were necessary to reduce the workload
on the controllers and management personnel who were now staffing the ATC
system. A system of airport reservations was established by the FAA to reduce
the flow of air traffic into major airports. In addition, the FAA implemented an
advanced form of flow control that restricted aircraft departures until it was
determined that sufficient airspace was available for each aircraft.
Flow control techniques had been experimented with on a limited basis
and were perfected when the FAA realized that PATCO was considering
engaging in an illegal strike. Flow control procedures required that the specialist at the FAA’s Central Flow Control Facility (CFCF) calculate optimal
airport acceptance rates and attempt to match the inbound flow of aircraft to
that acceptance rate. This procedure substitutes ground delays for airborne
holding and reduces airspace congestion around busy airports.
In the aftermath of the strike, the FAA claimed that staffing levels would
be restored within 2 years. In fact, it took close to 10 years before overall staffing levels returned to normal. During that time, the effects of deregulation
became apparent, with airlines choosing to operate from large, congested hub
airports. Hub-and-spoke procedures required that the airlines concentrate
arrivals and departures within limited time frames.

36 / CHAPTER 1
Delays began to increase, as did controller workload at most air traffic
control facilities. New ATC equipment was slow to become operational, while
existing equipment became difficult to maintain and operate. The nation’s air
traffic controllers (most of whom were hired to replace striking PATCO controllers) again became dissatisfied with their relations with the FAA and in 1987
voted to form a new union: the National Air Traffic Controllers Association
(NATCA). Although NATCA leadership has promised never to condone an illegal strike, it actively pressures Congress and the FAA to hire more controllers
and to accelerate the installation of advanced air traffic control systems.
1981–2001

Immediately after the strike, the FAA developed a billion dollar, multiyear air
traffic control modernization program called the Advanced Automation System (AAS). This system used new computers and controller workstations to
provide controllers with advanced displays and traffic management tools. This
program also involved the consolidation of many local approach controls into
existing air route traffic control centers. These new facilities, known as area
control facilities, were equipped with the new AAS. A similar system was also
installed in the remaining approach control facilities known as the Terminal
Advanced Automation System (TAAS).
Design criteria were established and a prime vendor for the program was
selected, but due to a variety of problems, including poor project management
and oversight, ill-defined system architecture, and rapidly changing technology,
the program dragged on with little progress. In the mid-1990s, the program
was canceled during a massive restructuring.
There were many reasons for this program’s lack of progress, but various
studies by the Government Accountability Office (GAO) and others indicated
that the government procurement process in general, and FAA procedures in
particular, made it difficult to develop and establish a long-term modernization
program in an area of rapidly changing technology. By the time the FAA had
defined standards, developed specifications, and awarded contracts, much of
the technology under consideration had often become obsolete. Many individuals and organizations, both in and out of government, questioned the FAA’s
ability to handle such a huge modernization project. Nevertheless, the FAA has
embarked on a thorough revamping of the ATC system called the Next Generation Air Transportation System (NextGen).
NextGen NextGen is the FAA’s plan to modernize and transform the National
Airspace System by the year 2025. It is an attempt to increase the capacity and
efficiency of the nation’s airspace while also improving safety, environmental
impact, and user access. NextGen will transform ATC from a ground-based to
a satellite-based system.
Some of the critical air traffic control equipment still in use by the FAA
is over 25 years old and is difficult to operate and maintain. The equipment
needs to be replaced in the interim as it barely meets current needs and will
not last until 2025. The FAA developed an interim modernization plan that

History of Air Trafﬁc Control

/

37

should help bridge the gap between today’s ground-based ATC system and the
satellite-based NextGen system.
These new system upgrades primarily use modified commercial off the
shelf (COTS) systems that are readily available. During the 1990s, the FAA
ordered new displays at the ARTCCs and new computer processing systems.
The displays, known as display system replacements (DSRs), provided the
controllers with programmable color displays similar to high-resolution computer screens. In the terminal environment, the standard terminal automation replacement system (STARS) was installed at high activity towers and
approach controls. STARS has the ability to receive and process information
from both terminal and en route radars and distribute this information on
color displays to multiple approach controllers and facilities. STARS automatically tracks primary and secondary surveillance targets and provides aircraft
position information to the Enhanced Traffic Management System (ETMS)
deployed by the FAA.
The ETMS ties together the Air Traffic Control System Command Center
(ATCSCC), Air Route Traffic Control Centers (ARTCCs), and major Terminal
Radar Approach Control (TRACON) facilities to manage the flow of air traffic
within the National Airspace System (NAS). Organizations such as the airlines,
Department of Defense, NASA, and others also have access to ETMS software
and data. ETMS provides tools that permit the FAA to try to match available
airport, sector, and airway capacity to aircraft demand.
All of these programs are underway and should provide a bridge until
NextGen components can be installed. A full discussion of this upgrade program is included in Chapter 12.
September
11, 2001

Tuesday, September 11, 2001, began like many other days. Airlines on the east
coast of the United States began flying early in the morning, with fliers further
west waking up and traveling to the airport expecting a normal day. This would
be a day unlike any other, with lasting changes to the FAA and the air travel
system.
American Airlines Flight 11, a Boeing 767, was scheduled to depart Boston at 7:45 a.m. and fly to Los Angeles. United Flight 175 was also scheduled
to depart Boston a few minutes later at 8:00 a.m. and bound for Los Angeles
as well. The two aircraft were fully loaded with fuel for their long, but routine,
journey.
American 11 took off at 7:59 a.m. At approximately 8:14 a.m. the aircraft was hijacked by terrorists and eventually flown into the north tower of
the World Trade Center in New York City, killing everyone on board. United
175 departed at 8:14 a.m. It was also hijacked and then steered into the south
tower of the World Trade Center, killing everyone on board. The combination
of the impact and the ignition of the full fuel load on each aircraft eventually
destroyed both towers, killing well over 2,000 people.
That same morning, American Airlines Flight 77, a Boeing 757, was
scheduled to fly from Washington Dulles to Los Angeles. It was hijacked as

38 / CHAPTER 1
well and flown to Washington, D.C., where it was intentionally crashed into the
Pentagon, killing everyone on board and over 100 people in the building.
Additionally, United Flight 93 was scheduled to fly from Newark to
San Francisco that morning. The flight departed about 25 minutes later than
planned, but like the previous three aircraft it was also hijacked by terrorists.
It has been speculated that the passengers, through cell phone communications
with the ground, discovered the plot to fly their aircraft into a building in
Washington, D.C., likely to have been either the Capitol or the White House. It
is believed that the passengers attempted to forcibly take control of the aircraft
while in flight. Shortly after 10:00 a.m., the out of control aircraft impacted
the ground in an empty field near Shanksville, Pennsylvania, killing everyone
on board.
Air defense of the United States at that time was, and still is, the responsibility of the North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD) but
requires close cooperation between NORAD and the FAA. In general, the FAA
monitors flights of aircraft within the continental United States, while NORAD
looks out beyond. If threats do develop, the FAA and NORAD jointly monitor
the situation, but it is NORAD that directs any military response.
The initial actions of the four hijacked aircraft, from the FAA’s point of
view, were not all that unusual. It is not unheard of for controllers to lose contact (either radio and/or radar) with aircraft for short periods of time. During
these rare occurrences, a controller’s natural response is to make an effort to
resume contact, either using the resources of the FAA or through the airlines
dispatch office. Loss of both radio and radar contact would indicate a more
severe problem, such as a crash, but would not automatically be thought of as
a threat to national security.
Aircraft have been hijacked in the past, and protocols have been developed to coordinate activities between the FAA and NORAD. However, these
procedures generally assume that the hijackers will make requests of some
type, either financial or political. The FAA’s role would then be to keep the
aircraft safely separated from other aircraft and provide a communications link
between the hijackers and law enforcement agencies.
But, on September 11, once the first aircraft impacted the World Trade Center, it became apparent that this historic event represented a new type of threat to
the United States. At the time, the FAA was unaware if terrorists planned to take
control or had already taken control of other aircraft. Within a short period of
time, FAA personnel decided to land every civilian aircraft flying over the United
States and close the country to inbound international flights. The FAA required
every aircraft flying over the United States, whether IFR or VFR, to land at the
nearest practicable airport. This was accomplished in a relatively short amount
of time, stranding passengers and aircraft across the country. International aircraft inbound to the United States either returned to their departure airport or
landed short of their destination in neighboring countries.
This total ban on civilian aircraft flights had never been attempted, and
there was no standard operating procedure for controllers to follow. There were

History of Air Trafﬁc Control

/

39

various protocols that had been devised for similar emergencies, but nothing
for a situation as extensive as this.
In a short period of time, U.S. airspace was closed to all but emergency
military operations with special permission required to resume flights. Over
the next few weeks, U.S. airspace gradually reopened, but with new security
restrictions, some of which remain today. From this day forward, air travel in
the United States would never be the same.
ATC
Privatization

Overall, airline traffic decreased for about 18 months in the aftermath of 9/11
but eventually recovered. The ATC system had begun to show signs of overload
as early as the 1990s, but this ensuing traffic reduction provided a brief respite.
As traffic increased again, fliers began to experience delays, and the national
airspace system was again unable to meet the needs of the flying public. Various
proposals for reorganizing the FAA were again brought up for discussion. Some
proposals involved simply relieving the FAA of much of the paperwork and red
tape inherent in any government organization. Others suggested completely
removing the FAA from the DOT and making it an autonomous federal entity
such as Amtrak. There were also plans that recommended removing the FAA
from the federal government and either turning it into a private corporation or
contracting many of the ATC functions of the FAA to private companies.
Under all of these proposals, although air traffic control functions might
be removed from the FAA, air safety and regulation would remain the responsibility of the federal government. Other nations, including Canada, Germany,
the United Kingdom, and Australia, are either experimenting with or have
converted to similar operating systems.
The FAA has already begun to privatize or contract out some air traffic
control related services. Many FAA training functions have been delegated
to private industry and educational institutions. The operation of many lowactivity control towers has been contracted out to private industry. In most
of these cases, the FAA provides operational funding to contractors who then
operate the towers at a much lower cost than could the FAA. Domestic flight
service stations are now operated under contract by a private corporation.
Politically, however, it is difficult to close, sell, or transfer federal facilities,
move federal employees, or transfer federal employees to private contractors.
Proposals to expand privatization raise as many, or more, political considerations as operational questions. But, the FAA is moving down this path, albeit
at a much slower pace than is occurring in some other countries.

Some of the critical air traffic control equipment used, and still in use, by the
ATC
Modernization FAA is over 25 years old and is difficult to operate and maintain. The FAA
developed an interim modernization plan that it intends to implement rapidly.
These new system upgrades primarily use modified COTS systems that are
readily available. By the mid-1990s, the FAA had begun to develop new displays for the ARTCCs and new computer processing systems. These upgrades
will permit the FAA to progress to the next stage of air traffic control known

40 / CHAPTER 1

as NextGen. Prior to that milestone being realized, the backbone of the FAA
computing system will be replaced with an interim program. This program is
known as En Route Automation Modernization (ERAM).
En route
The main computer infrastructure of the FAA’s computer system in the ARTCCs
Automation
is still based on technology and programming languages that are close to 40 years
Modernization old. ERAM is designed as a bridge to NextGen. In general, ERAM will double
the computer processing power of the ATC system while using modern equipment and computer programming languages. The system will have the capability
to integrate satellite-based navigation and communication technologies.
Initial ERAM installation began in 2008 with subsequent installations to
be completed by 2010. Once fully installed and operational, additional capabilities will be added, eventually permitting a reduction in separation and improved
flight plan processing and automation. After installation is complete, additional
capabilities can be added in a manner systematically leading to NextGen.
While developing and installing these two systems, the FAA has also
committed to a long-term upgrade of the nation’s communication, navigation,
surveillance (CNS), and air traffic management (ATM) systems. This upgrade
will bring the U.S. air traffic control system into compliance with future ICAO
standards for navigation and air traffic management.
The current CNS system in the United States is composed primarily of
ground-based electronic systems. ATM functions are provided primarily by air
traffic controllers monitoring this equipment, making decisions, and communicating these instructions via voice radio systems. The future CNS/ATM system,
as envisioned by ICAO and the FAA, replaces much of the CNS function with
space-based satellite systems and uses high-capacity ground-based computers
to provide controllers with many ATM tools. Instead of delineating specific
systems for use, the FAA will develop performance standards in each area. As
technology advances, new systems will be considered for implementation so
long as they meet the defined performance standard.
When fully implemented, pilots should be able to fly more directly from
their departure airport to their destination with minimal route or altitude
changes. Controllers will play a more passive role, intervening only when
needed. This new concept of air traffic control, known as free flight, will become
the model for air traffic control later in the next century. Details of the required
CNS/ATM programs and improvements leading to free flight are described in
Table 1–2 and discussed in detail in Chapter 12.
Air Traffic
Controller
Staffing

The FAA still faces a shortage of controllers. By act of Congress, controllers
cannot be older than 30 years of age when first employed by the FAA. Depending on the type of position they have held during their careers, most controllers
can retire after 20 to 30 years of service. Virtually the entire active controller
workforce in the FAA was hired between 1981 and 1990. Over 10,000 controllers were hired to replace the fired PATCO strikers, and most of the controllers
who did not go out on strike have either retired or moved into management or

History of Air Trafﬁc Control
Table 1–2.

/

41

Present and Future CNS/ATM Systems

Communications

Present

Future

Domestic VHF/UHF

Digital voice communications

Oceanic HF

Digital data link

Limited data link
(mode-C, ACARS)
Navigation

Ground-based transmitters

Satellite-based

(VOR, NDB, ILS)

Required Navigation
Performance

Surveillance

Radar or position
reporting

Automatic Dependent
Surveillance (satellite)

Air traffic
management

Controller interprets data,
then makes decisions

Computer makes short-term
aircraft separation decisions;
controller manages airspace

supervisory positions. Thus, the FAA has had a comparatively young and
healthy workforce with little turnover for close to two decades, and therefore
little need for new employees.
Having started in about the year 2005 and continuing through 2014,
the majority of the current controller workforce will be eligible for retirement.
Their impending departure leaves the FAA with a tremendous challenge: how
to screen, train, and certify the needed controllers in a short period of time.
One program that attempts to meet these needs is the collegiate training
initiative (CTI). Under this program, selected colleges and universities include
the basic skills training needed by the FAA as part of their aviation curriculum.
Graduates of these programs, upon completion of other FAA requirements,
are eligible for hiring and placement in the FAA system. The FAA selected
13 schools for the program in 1997, with additional schools being added to
bring the total to nearly 40 schools by 2010. Details about this program and
other means of seeking FAA employment are included in Chapter 13.
All these changes, both those in progress and proposed, indicate a bold,
new, exciting, yet uncertain future for air traffic control. In the future, air travel
will increase, aircraft will get larger, and airspace will become more congested.
New equipment and procedures are badly needed. Many factors, such as politics, incidents, and possibly accidents, will have a dramatic influence on the air
traffic control system. The blueprint for change is there, but history shows that
change within the FAA is usually slower than planned and at a higher cost than
originally predicted. It is unclear at this point exactly how and when the system
will change, but change it must if the air transportation system is to keep pace
with predicted growth.

42 / CHAPTER 1

KEY TERMS
active control
advanced automation system
(AAS)
Air Commerce Act
Air Coordinating Committee
(ACC)
Air Navigation Development
Board (ANDB)
air route surveillance radar
air route traffic controller
Air Traffic Control Association
(ATCA)
air traffic controller
air traffic management (ATM)
Airline Deregulation Act
Airmail Act of 1925
airport surveillance radar
(ASR)
airway traffic control centers
(ATCCs)
airway traffic control stations
(ATCSs)
airway traffic control units
(ATCUs)
automated radar terminal system
(ARTS)
Bureau of Air Commerce
Central Flow Control Facility
(CFCF)
Civil Aeronautics Administration
(CAA)
Civil Aeronautics Authority (CAA)
Civil Aeronautics Board (CAB)
civil air regulations (CARs)

collegiate training initiative (CTI)
commercial off the shelf (COTS)
communication, navigation,
surveillance (CNS)
control tower
controlled airspace
Department of Transportation
(DOT)
display system replacements
(DSRs)
distance measuring equipment
(DME)
Enhanced Traffic Management
System (ETMS)
En Route Automation
Modernization (ERAM)
Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA)
Federal Aviation Agency (FAA)
flight data processing (FDP)
flight service stations (FSSs)
flow control
instrument flight rules (IFR)
instrument landing system (ILS)
instrument meteorological
conditions (IMC)
International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO)
interstate airway communication
stations (INSACSs)
light guns
Morrow Report
National Air Traffic Controllers
Association (NATCA)

National Aviation Facilities
Experimental Center (NAFEC)
National Transportation Safety
Board (NTSB)
navigation aids (navaids)
Next Generation Air
Transportation System
(NextGen)
North American Aerospace
Defense Command (NORAD)
passive control
precision approach radar (PAR)
Professional Air Traffic
Controllers Organization
(PATCO)
Project Beacon
radar data processing (RDP)
Radio Technical Commission for
Aeronautics (RTCA)
semiautomated ground
environment (SAGE)
shrimp boat
Special Committee 31 (SC-31)
standard terminal automation
replacement system (STARS)
tactical air navigation (TACAN)
transponder
terminal advanced automation
system (TAAS)
uncontrolled airspace
VHF omnidirectional range
(VOR)
visual flight rules (VFR)

History of Air Trafﬁc Control

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. How did the federal government become involved in air traffic control?
2. How did airmail affect air traffic control?
3. What are VFR and IFR?
4. Who was the first air traffic controller?
5. What were and where were the first air traffic control facilities?
6. What is the history of the Federal Aviation Administration?
7. What is the history of labor organizations in the air traffic control profession?
8. What was the primary cause of the FAA’s failure to upgrade the nation’s air traffic
control system?
9. What is meant by CNS/ATM?
10. How will the CNS/ATM system have to be upgraded if free flight is to become a
reality?
11. Describe the effects of the events of 9/11 on the air traffic control system.

/

43

2
Navigation Systems
Checkpoints
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Identify the en route navigation aids in use today.
2. Identify the approach navigation aids in use today.
3. Brieﬂy explain the operating principles behind each of these navigation aids.
4. Properly interpret an instrument approach procedures chart.
5. Properly interpret an instrument en route navigation chart.
6. Properly interpret a VFR sectional chart.
7. Determine whether an instrument approach procedure is a precision or a
nonprecision procedure.
8. Describe the concept of Required Navigation Performance.

Navigation Systems

/

45

One of the first scheduled airline flights in the United States occurred just prior
to World War I. The St. Petersburg–Tampa Airboat Lines was established to provide regular passenger service between the two Florida cities. For three months,
during the winter of 1914, the airline flourished. But when spring arrived, the
tourists departed north, and with the lack of passengers, the airline folded.
No other serious attempts at starting airline service were made during World
War I.
At the conclusion of the war, the federal government disposed of many of
its military aircraft, selling them to private individuals as surplus property. This
enormous influx of inexpensive aircraft helped establish the aviation industry
in the United States. Some airline companies were formed after the war using
these surplus aircraft, but they proved to be as short-lived as the St. Petersburg–
Tampa line. The available war surplus aircraft were expensive to operate and
maintain, forcing the airlines to charge passengers high fares. Only the wealthy
could afford to fly at these high prices, and they were accustomed to traveling in luxury, not in war surplus aircraft. Trying to lure passengers using these
aircraft thus proved to be nearly impossible, and most of the fledgling airline
companies folded.
In 1916, in the midst of World War I, Congress had authorized the Post
Office Department to institute the nation’s first official airmail service. The war
delayed the implementation of this policy until 1918. The first flight, from New
York City to Washington, D.C., was finally conducted on May 15 of that year,
using U.S. Army aircraft. Airmail service soon proved to be commercially successful, and within three months the Post Office Department began to transport
the mail using its own aircraft and pilots. Additional routes were soon added,
and the Post Office Department eventually came to provide airmail service
from coast to coast.
Within a few years, in an attempt to stabilize the fledgling airline industry,
the Post Office Department began to contract airmail routes to the few remaining airline companies still struggling to survive. Airmail contracts proved to be a
lifesaver to these airlines, since they could now transport mail while conducting
passenger flights and use the airmail payments as a subsidy to reduce fares and
attract more passengers. The resultant increase in revenue permitted the airlines
to dispose of their war surplus aircraft and invest in larger and more luxurious
aircraft specifically designed to carry passengers. But this merging of passenger
and airmail service complicated airline scheduling and operations. When carrying only airmail, airlines could delay flights because of poor weather conditions or darkness. But delays were unacceptable when carrying fare-paying
passengers. Passengers demanded that the airlines fly consistent schedules with
as few delays as possible. If the airlines hoped to lure passengers away from
their main competitor, the railroads, they would have to offer fast, timely
flights with few or no delays. Methods that would permit flying during poor
weather or at night would have to be developed if the airlines were to survive
and prosper.

46 / CHAPTER 2

Visual Navigation
Initially, because they lacked flight instruments or navigation systems, airline
pilots were limited to daylight flying during good weather conditions. The pilots
were forced to use outside visual references to control their aircraft’s attitude,
relying on the natural horizon as a reference. They would note any changes in
the flight attitude of their aircraft and make the necessary control adjustments
that would keep their aircraft in level flight.
Pilotage

Pilots navigated from airport to airport using either pilotage or deduced reckoning (commonly called dead reckoning). Pilotage required that the pilot use a
map of the surrounding area as a reference. The pilot would draw a line on the
map, extending from the departure to the destination airport, and note any
prominent landmarks that would be passed while in flight. As the aircraft
passed these landmarks, the pilot would note any deviation from the planned
flight path and adjust the aircraft’s heading to return to the preplanned
course.
Since the winds at the aircraft’s cruising altitude usually caused the aircraft to drift either left or right of course, the pilot was forced to constantly
alter the aircraft’s heading to counteract these crosswinds. This change in heading is known as the crosswind correction angle or wind correction angle. The
resultant path in which the aircraft flies over the ground is known as the ground
track or the course.

Aeronautical
Charts

The maps used by pilots in the early 1920s were common road maps available
at automobile service stations. These maps were unsuitable for aerial navigation since they lacked the necessary landmark information needed to accurately
navigate from one airport to the next. It soon became apparent that pilots
needed a specialized chart expressly designed for use in aeronautical navigation. The U.S. government then developed and began to print such air navigation charts, known as sectional charts.
Sectional charts are aeronautical charts scaled 1:500,000 or about 8
statute miles to the inch. Sectional charts are still used today and depict
the relevant information needed by pilots to navigate accurately and
safely. This information includes cities, highways, railroads, airport locations, terrain features, and distinctive objects (see Figure 2–1). Sectional
charts also depict navigation aids, federal airways, and air traffic control
facilities. With very little change over the years, sectional charts are still
being printed by the National Ocean Service (part of the U.S. Department
of Commerce) and are primarily used by pilots flying under VFR rules
(see Figure 2–2). In addition, pilots flying IFR usually carry appropriate
sectional charts in case of navigational equipment failure. If IFR pilots
should encounter any electronic navigation problems during flight, they
may be able to continue under VFR conditions using sectional charts for
visual navigation.

Navigation Systems

Figure 2–1. An example of a legend for a sectional chart.

/

47

48 / CHAPTER 2

Figure 2–2. Sample sectional chart.

Navigation Systems

/

49

Some pilots carry world aeronautical charts (WACs) instead of sectionals during IFR flights (see Figure 2–3). WACs are similar to sectionals but are
scaled 1:1,000,000 or about 16 miles to the inch. They present less-detailed
information to the pilot but cover a larger area than a sectional chart.
Dead
Reckoning

When flying using VFR rules, most pilots use dead reckoning, in combination
with pilotage, to navigate to their destination. With dead reckoning, the pilot
uses the forecast winds at the planned cruising altitude and applies trigonometry to deduce the proper heading that the aircraft should fly to counteract the
crosswind. Properly calculated, this method of navigation is very accurate;
however, it is hampered by the fact that the winds-aloft information is a forecast not a reflection of the actual winds. To verify that dead reckoning has
calculated the proper heading, the pilot must still visually check the accuracy
of the deduced heading by using a sectional chart.

Flight
Planning

The first step in planning a flight using both dead reckoning and pilotage is to
determine the true course that will lead the aircraft to the destination airport.
This is accomplished by drawing a line from the departure airport to the destination on the sectional chart. The pilot then determines the angle of this course
in reference to true north, using a device called a plotter. The pilot obtains the
forecast wind speed and direction at the chosen cruising altitude and, using
either a mechanical or an electronic computer, calculates the true heading that
the aircraft must fly.
The deduced true heading is the direction that the aircraft must be aimed
in order to track to the desired destination. If there is not wind at the aircraft’s
cruising altitude, the true heading and the true course will be exactly the
same. However if the pilot encounters a crosswind, he or she must angle the
aircraft into the wind to remain on course. The angular difference between
the aircraft’s heading and the true course is the crosswind correction or wind
correction angle.

Aircraft Instrumentation
Magnetic
Compass

Aeronautical charts cannot be properly used by pilots unless they have accurate
aircraft heading information. All of these charts are oriented with respect to
true north. Unfortunately, the only instrument aboard most aircraft that actually indicates heading is a magnetic compass, which usually points toward magnetic north (see Figure 2–4).
The angular difference between true north and magnetic north is known
as variation (see Figure 2–5). The variation depends on the aircraft’s current
location. In different areas of the United States, the variation may range from
0° to as much as 20°. To properly use the magnetic compass when navigating,
the pilot must add the variation to or subtract it from the aircraft’s true heading

50 / CHAPTER 2

Figure 2–3. Sample world aeronautical chart.

/

51

Beech Aircraft Corporation

Navigation Systems

Figure 2–4. The magnetic compass.

Easterly variation
20∞

Westerly variation
15∞ 10∞ 5∞ 0∞5∞10∞ 15∞ 20∞
20∞

20∞

15∞

10∞
15∞
5∞
Agonic line
10∞

5∞

0∞

Figure 2–5. Variation chart.

to determine the magnetic heading that must be flown. The pilot may then fly
this heading using the aircraft’s magnetic compass.
Although the magnetic compass is a relatively reliable instrument, it is
subject to various inaccuracies. One of these inaccuracies is known as deviation. Deviation is caused by the stray magnetic fields of electrical equipment or
metallic structures within the aircraft. Since all aircraft contain some stray magnetic fields, every plane is required to be equipped with a compass deviation

52 / CHAPTER 2
card that lists the inaccuracies and the correction that must be applied when
interpreting the magnetic compass.
A few other conditions can cause the magnetic compass to indicate inaccurately. During changes in airspeed or while the aircraft is turning, the magnetic
compass will not indicate correctly. These particular inaccuracies are known
as acceleration and turning errors. In general, the only time that the magnetic
compass can be accurately interpreted is when the aircraft is in straight and
level, unaccelerated flight. In addition, the placement of a metal or magnetized
object (such as a flashlight, clipboard, or screwdriver) near the compass will
alter the local magnetic field and cause magnetic compass errors.
Many of the problems inherent in the magnetic compass can be alleviated by
using a heading indicator (see Figure 2–6). Because the heading indicator is a
gyroscopic instrument, it is not subject to the same problems that affect the
magnetic compass. The heading indicator is initially set by the pilot while on
the ground. When properly set, it accurately reflects the aircraft’s magnetic
heading during flight. As the aircraft turns, the heading indicator rotates, constantly displaying the correct heading.
The heading indicator is not subject to acceleration or turning errors, and
it is immune to stray magnetic fields. It has, however, a few inherent problems.
Since it is unable to sense magnetic fields, it must be properly adjusted by the
pilot before being used. If the pilot sets the indicator incorrectly, it will not
accurately reflect the aircraft’s magnetic heading. In addition, since the heading
indicator is subject to internal bearing friction and will slowly drift and begin
to indicate inaccurately, the pilot must constantly check its accuracy and reset
it as necessary during the flight. It is also possible, though highly unlikely, that
the heading indicator will fail mechanically, not indicating the proper heading
even when properly set. The heading indicator is also subject to precession and
should be periodically reset during the flight.

Beech Aircraft Corporation

Heading
Indicator

Figure 2–6. A heading indicator.

Navigation Systems

/

53

VFR Navigation
In theory, using dead reckoning alone, the pilot should be able to fly the computed heading and arrive over the airport at the calculated time. But in reality, because of imprecise winds-aloft forecasts, most pilots use a combination
of pilotage and dead reckoning. The proper heading and time must still be
deduced and used, but en route navigation checkpoints are established and
marked on the appropriate sectional charts. As the pilot flies toward the destination, he or she makes periodic checks to determine whether the aircraft is
still on course. If it has deviated from the planned route, the pilot will adjust the
aircraft’s heading to return to and remain on the desired flight path. As archaic
and old fashioned as this may seem, it is still the primary method of navigation
for most VFR pilots today.
Although visual navigation works quite well during daylight hours, at
night or in marginal weather conditions it is almost impossible for pilots to
see objects on the ground and make an accurate determination of their aircraft’s position. Sparsely populated areas of the country may not offer sufficient
ground references to permit the pilot to determine the aircraft’s location. If and
when the pilot finally arrives at the destination airport, he or she may find it
difficult to actually locate the runway in the dark and land the aircraft. The
solution, of course, is to have both airport and airway lighting.
In the 1920s, airports were illuminated through the use of airport boundary lighting, which consisted of steady-burning 40-watt lights on wooden stakes
every 300 feet around the perimeter of the airport. Eventually, these lights
were equipped with lenses to concentrate the light beam and were mounted
on orange-colored steel cones so that they could also be clearly seen during
daylight hours. With the outline of the airport now quite visible, the pilots were
able to safely land and take off at night.
As noted in Chapter 1, the first airway lighting was also instituted in the
1920s. At equal intervals along the airway, rotating beacon lights were installed
that delineated the airway’s center line (see Figure 2–7). These rotating beacons
were installed on steel towers and consisted of 1,000-watt electric lamps that
produced a white light of approximately 1,000,000 candlepower. Each lamp
was housed in a rotating drum assembly equipped with 36-inch-diameter lenses
at each end. One lens was clear while the other lens was colored. The beacon
rotated at a speed of about six revolutions per minute. These rotating beacons
were installed along the airway at 15-mile intervals. As the pilots flew along the
airway, the beacons would appear as flashes of light visible from a distance of
over 40 miles. To visually navigate along the airway, all the pilot needed to do
was to fly from one beacon to the next.
Each rotating beacon was equipped with a colored lens that uniquely
identified that particular beacon and enabled pilots to accurately determine
their position. Each airport along the airway was also equipped with a rotating
beacon having one clear and one green lens. These beacons were designed to
help pilots determine the airport’s exact location. The green and white rotating

Michael Nolan

54 / CHAPTER 2

Figure 2–7. A rotating beacon.

beacons are still used at civilian airports today. Other color combinations are
used to differentiate other types of airports. The assigned colors for rotating
beacons are as follows:
White and green

Land airport

Green and green*

Land airport

White and yellow

Water airport

Yellow and yellow*

Water airport

Green, white, and white

Military airport

Green, yellow, and white

Lighted heliport

* Green or yellow rotating beacons are used to prevent confusion when another airport with a
similarly colored rotating beacon is located nearby.

Navigation Systems

/

55

Instrument Flying

Beech Aircraft Corporation

Lighting the airports and airways proved to be a tremendous advance in nighttime navigation, but it still required that pilots fly in weather conditions that
would permit them to see the rotating beacons. If a pilot flew in or above a
cloud layer, or if the flight visibility diminished to less than 15 miles, he or she
would be unable to see the rotating beacons and navigate to the destination
airport. As advances were made in aircraft design and instrumentation, it soon
became possible for pilots to control their aircraft using just cockpit instrumentation, flying their aircraft without visual reference to the natural horizon. The
new cockpit instruments were based on gyroscopic principles and included the
artificial horizon (now called the attitude indicator), the heading indicator, and
the turn and bank indicator (now called the turn coordinator).
The attitude indicator (Figure 2–8) mimics the movements of the natural
horizon, providing the pilot with accurate aircraft attitude information. Using
the attitude indicator, pilots can determine whether their aircraft is banked
and whether its nose is pointed up or down. This allows them to adjust their
aircraft’s flight attitude and keep the aircraft upright and under control.
The heading indicator, as described previously in this chapter, provides a
more stable and accurate indication of the aircraft’s flight direction than does
the magnetic compass. The turn coordinator (Figure 2–9) is used by the pilot
to indicate the direction and the rate of turn.
These instruments, used in conjunction with the already existing altimeter
(Figure 2–10) and airspeed indicator (Figure 2–11), made it possible for pilots
to accurately control their aircraft without reference to the natural horizon.
Unfortunately, the federal airway system had not kept pace with these
instrumentation developments and, until the late 1920s, was still based on sectional charts and rotating beacons, which required that pilots have at least 15
to 20 miles of visibility to navigate at night. There was no provision for navigation when the visibility dropped below these values.

Figure 2–8. The attitude
indicator.

Figure 2–9. The turn
coordinator.

Figure 2–10. The
altimeter.

Figure 2–11. The
airspeed indicator.

56 / CHAPTER 2

Electronic Navigation

g

O

le

n-

se

co

ur

ur

co

se

n-

le

O

g

In an early attempt to remedy this situation, the federal government began to
install the four-course radio range in the late 1920s. This new radio device was
placed at intervals along each federal airway and permitted the pilot to navigate without using outside visual references. Four-course radio ranges soon
became the U.S. and international standard for aviation navigation and were
widely used in the United States until the 1950s.
The four-course radio range used a 1,500-watt transmitter that operated on a frequency between 190 and 565 kHz. The transmitting antenna consisted of two single-wire vertical loops strung out on five wooden masts. These
wires were attached to the masts to form two figure-eight patterns (see Figure
2–12). This arrangement produced two separate radio transmission patterns

N
Transmitter

A

A

g
le

le
se
co
ur
n-

e

s
ur

co

Figure 2–12. Field pattern of four-course radio range.

nO

g

N

O

Four-Course
Radio Range

Navigation Systems

/

57

that overlapped slightly. One loop constantly transmitted the Morse code for
the letter A (dot-dash); the other transmitted the Morse code for the letter
N (dash-dot). Any pilot wishing to use a four-course range simply tuned the
receiver on the aircraft to the proper frequency and listened to the transmitted
signal through earphones. If the aircraft was located somewhere within the A
sector, the pilot would hear Morse code for the letter A (dot-dash) constantly
being repeated. If the aircraft was in the N sector, the pilot would hear the
Morse code for the letter N (dash-dot). If the aircraft was located where the
two transmissions overlapped (the on-course line of position), the dot-dash and
the dash-dot would be of equal strength and would produce a constant tone in
the pilot’s headset.
When navigating to a four-course radio range, all the pilot needed to do
was to head the aircraft toward one of these on-course “legs” and then proceed
along it to the radio range. If the aircraft drifted off course, the pilot would
begin to hear the individual A or N Morse code becoming dominant, requiring an adjustment in the aircraft’s heading until he or she could again hear the
constant on-course tone. The wire loop antennas of the four-course range could
be constructed in such a manner as to “aim” the on-course legs toward other
radio ranges.
Although it permitted navigation during periods of low visibility, the
four-course (or A–N) range still had a number of deficiencies that limited its
usefulness. For example, disoriented pilots found it very difficult to accurately
determine their position using the A–N range. Although pilots could easily
determine whether their aircraft was located on one of the on-course legs,
they often found it impossible to determine which of the four legs they were
on. Through trial and error, a pilot could eventually determine which heading would keep the aircraft on course and lead to the station. If the pilot was
between on-course legs (totally within either an A or an N sector), it was time
consuming and difficult to pinpoint the aircraft’s location and determine the
proper heading that would lead to an on-course leg. In addition, since the A–N
ranges operated in the 190 to 565 kHz band (just below the present AM radio
band), the transmitted signal could easily be distorted by obstructions or disrupted by lightning-induced static.
In mountainous areas, it was possible for the radio transmission of the
four-course range to bounce off nearby terrain and produce false on-course
signals. During thunderstorms, when pilots desperately needed the course
guidance of the radio range, lightning-induced static could overwhelm the
relatively weak signal transmitted by the radio range, leaving the pilot with
only static emanating from the receiver. Certainly, the A–N range was a tremendous advancement in instrument navigation, but these deficiencies limited
its overall use.
Introduction
of Marker
Beacons

The A–N range provided the pilot with only bearing and course information.
It did not provide any information concerning distance to the station. To minimize this problem, the CAA began installing marker beacons along the oncourse legs. These low-powered radio beacons were designed to transmit a

58 / CHAPTER 2
distinctive tone and code that could be received by the aircraft as it passed
directly overhead. The pilots could use the code to identify which beacon was
crossed and use this information to accurately determine their aircraft’s position along the on-course leg. But whenever the aircraft was between marker
beacons or no longer on one of the on-course legs, the marker beacons were
useless in helping determine the aircraft’s location.
While the CAA was developing and installing A–N radio ranges, the nondirectional radio beacon (NDB) was also being developed. The NDB transmits a
uniform signal omnidirectionally from the transmitter, using the low- and
medium-frequency band (190–540 kHz). The receiver on the aircraft (known
as a direction finder or DF) was originally equipped with a looptype antenna
that the pilot rotated manually. When the antenna was rotated so that the plane
of the loop was perpendicular to the transmitted signal, the “null” position was
reached, and the pilot would be able to hear the transmitted signal. Using the
magnetic compass and the NDB receiver, the pilot could then determine the
aircraft’s bearing from the nondirectional beacon. This bearing could be plotted on a chart as line of position. Plotting lines of position from two NDBs
permitted the pilot to pinpoint the aircraft’s exact location. If the pilot wished
to fly toward the NDB, he or she would turn until the NDB station was located
directly ahead of the aircraft. If the winds aloft caused the aircraft to drift off
course, the pilot would readjust the aircraft’s heading, keeping the NDB directly
ahead of the aircraft. This method of navigation is called homing.

Automatic
Direction
Finder

Trying to manually manipulate the DF antenna while flying the aircraft proved
to be a cumbersome method of navigation and usually provided the pilot with
relatively inaccurate position information. As advances were made in aircraft
electronics, the manually operated NDB receiver was soon replaced by the
automatic direction finder (ADF), which could electronically determine the
bearing to the NDB and display this information to the pilot (see Figure 2–13).
Using ADF equipment in conjunction with the aircraft’s heading indicator, the

Beech Aircraft Corporation

Nondirectional
Beacons

Figure 2–13. ADF receiver and indicator.

Navigation Systems

/

59

pilot could easily determine the aircraft’s relative bearing from the station and
use this information to determine the proper heading that would lead to the
beacon.
The development of the ADF hastened pilot acceptance of the NDB as
a navigation aid. The first NDB was installed in the United States in 1924. By
1964, 272 high-powered NDBs had been installed throughout the country.
A series of federal airways using NDBs for en route navigation were soon
developed. Because these airways were designated by a color and a number
(for example, RED-64 or GREEN-32), they were soon referred to simply as
colored airways.
Compass
Locators

In addition to their role as en route navigation aids, NDBs were located at
airports or along instrument-approach paths to assist pilots who were conducting such approaches. NDBs along the final approach are known as compass
locators. In 1965, the federal government began to decommission the highpowered NDBs used for en route navigation. Due to their extremely low cost
and ease of installation, however, low-power units continued to serve smaller
airports as instrument-approach aids.

Visual Aural
Range

In 1937, the Radio Development Section of the Bureau of Air Commerce demonstrated an improved radio range at its research center in Indianapolis. This
new radio range, called the visual aural range (VAR), was an improvement over
the old A–N range in two major areas. The VAR was designed to operate in the
very high frequency (VHF) band located around 63 mHz. This frequency band
was chosen since transmitters operating on VHF frequencies are rarely affected
by static caused by lightning. VHF transmissions are also line of sight, which
means that they do not follow the curvature of the earth. One significant advantage of using VHF frequencies is that although they can easily be blocked by
terrain and obstructions, they are seldom reflected by them. The use of VHF
frequencies would thus minimize the reflection problem that plagued the A–N
ranges.
The VAR also solved the orientation problem inherent with the A–N
range by transmitting four radio signals instead of two. While retaining the
Morse-coded A and N signals, the VAR also transmitted overlapping “blue”
and “yellow” signals perpendicular to the A and N signals (see Figure 2–14). An
instrument on board the aircraft would indicate whether it was in the blue or
the yellow sector. The pilot was still required to listen to the VAR to determine
whether the aircraft was within the A or the N sector, however. The addition
of the overlapping color signals gave each sector a unique identification that
enabled pilots to accurately determine their aircraft’s location.
The first operational VAR was installed at Matawan, New Jersey, in 1944.
By 1948 a total of sixty-eight VARs had been commissioned by the CAA and
were located along federal airways. The VAR never gained wide acceptance,
however, since it was soon replaced by an improved radio range that emitted
an infinite number of courses instead of just four. This new navigation aid was

g

O

le

n-

se

co

ur

ur

co

se

n-

le

O

g

60 / CHAPTER 2

N
Transmitter

Yellow
sector

A

A

g

le

le
se
ur
co
n-

se

ur

co

n-

O

Blue
sector

O

g

N

Figure 2–14. VAR operation.

called the VHF omnidirectional range (VOR). In the early 1950s, as VORs were
being installed around the country, the CAA began to decommission the VARs,
with the last being retired from service in 1960.
VHF Omnidirectional
Range (VOR)

Research on a radio range that would offer pilots more than four courses and
transmit in the static-free VHF radio spectrum had started in 1937. The
Washington Institute of Technology delivered the first operable VHF omnidirectional range (VOR) to the CAA in 1944. This experimental VOR operated
on a frequency of 125 mHz. After extensive testing and development by the CAA,
three prototype VORs were installed at Patuxent River, Maryland; Philipsburg,
Pennsylvania; and Ogden, Utah. After operational testing at these three sites, the
CAA adopted the VOR as the national civil navigation standard in 1946. The

/

61

Wadsworth, Inc., photo by Paul Bowen Photography, Inc.

Navigation Systems

Figure 2–15. VOR ground station.

VOR was also selected as the international civil navigation standard in 1949 by
the International Civil Aviation Organization (see Figure 2–15).
VOR Operation The VOR offered a number of improvements over the old
A–N and VAR methods. The VOR transmits an infinite number of navigation
courses, selectable by the pilot, instead of just four. The VOR is also relatively
immune to the reflections and static inherent in the operation of the A–N ranges.
Each VOR is assigned a frequency between 108.10 and 117.90 mHz. The
VOR transmission is modulated with two signals: a reference-phase signal that
is constant in all directions and a variable-phase signal whose phase varies with
azimuth. The variable-phase signal is modulated so that at magnetic north the
reference and variable signals are precisely in phase with each other. In any other
direction, the VOR is designed so that the two signals are no longer in phase.
The VOR receiver on board the aircraft measures the phase difference
between the two signals to determine the azimuth angle of the aircraft in relation

62 / CHAPTER 2

R
R
V

315∞
Radial

V

360∞
Radial

R
45∞
Radial

R

V

R

VOR
270∞
Radial

90∞
Radial

V

V
R

R

135∞
Radial

225∞
Radial
180∞
Radial
V

V
V
R = Reference signal

V = Variable signal

Figure 2–16. VOR operation.

to the VOR transmitter. When the aircraft is directly east of the VOR, the variable signal will lag the reference signal by 90°. An aircraft located directly east
of the VOR is said to be on the 90° radial of the VOR (see Figure 2–16). An
aircraft directly south of the VOR will receive the variable signal lagging the
reference signal by 180° and will be on the 180° radial. An aircraft located on
the 359° radial (north of the VOR) will receive the variable signal lagging the
reference signal by 359°.
The radial to be flown by the pilot is selected on the aircraft’s VOR indicator (see Figure 2–17) using the omni bearing selector (OBS). After selecting the
appropriate VOR frequency, the indicator in the cockpit will inform the pilot
whether the selected course will lead to the station or away from it (known as
the To–From flag). The VOR indicator will also display any lateral deviation
from the selected course, using a vertical pointer known as the course deviation

/

63

Bendix/King Division of Allied Signal Aerospace Company

Navigation Systems

Figure 2–17. VOR receiver and indicator.

indicator (CDI). If the aircraft is to the right of the selected course, the CDI will
be to the left of center, advising the pilot to alter the aircraft’s course to the left
in order to return to the selected radial. If the aircraft is left of course, the CDI
will be right of center. If the aircraft is precisely located on the radial selected
by the pilot, the CDI will be centered.
VORs used for en route navigation have an output power of 200 watts
and are assigned a frequency between 112.00 and 117.90 mHz. This signal
permits en route VOR reception up to a distance of 200 miles. Terminal VORs
(used solely for instrument approaches) have an effective radiated power of
50 watts and are assigned a frequency between 108.10 and 111.80 mHz.
Terminal VORs can be received up to a distance of about 25 nautical miles. Since
VOR transmissions are line of sight, these reception distances vary depending
on the receiving aircraft’s altitude (see Figure 2–18).
VOR Categories A number of difficulties were encountered as soon as the
CAA began to install VORs along the federal airways. Since VHF transmissions
are line of sight, low-flying aircraft were unable to receive the VOR signal if
they were “below the horizon.” This limitation forced the CAA to place the
VORs no farther than 80 miles from each other to ensure adequate reception for aircraft operating at low altitudes. Because only a limited number

64 / CHAPTER 2

A and B received

A received

B received

No
signal

VOR A

VOR B
Approximate coverage
Maximum distance in
statute miles from VOR

Altitude of
aircraft

45
100
150
200

1,000
5,000
10,000
20,000

Figure 2–18. VOR reception distances.

of frequencies can be assigned to VORs, some would have to be assigned the
same operating frequency, which could cause interference problems for aircraft
operating at very high altitudes, as they might receive the signals being broadcast from two or more VORs operating on the same frequency. The resulting
interference would render the navigation signal unusable.
The CAA responded by designating every VOR as a terminal, low-, or
high-altitude VOR. Terminal VORs (TVORs) are low powered and are usable
up to a distance of 2.5 nautical miles. TVORs are not to be used for en route
navigation but are reserved for local navigation and instrument approaches.
Low-altitude VORs guarantee interference-free reception to aircraft operating
up to 40 nautical miles away. This interference-free zone is guaranteed only at
or below 18,000 feet. Low-altitude VORs cannot be used by aircraft operating
above 18,000 feet or farther than 40 miles away, as there is no guarantee that
another VOR operating on the same frequency will not cause interference. Highaltitude VORs are used by aircraft operating between 18,000 and 60,000 feet,
at ranges up to 200 nautical miles. These limitations imposed upon VORs are
known as service volumes (see Figures 2–19 and 2–20).

Navigation Systems

/

65

100 n mi
40 n mi

60,000 ft.
130 n mi

18,000 ft.

45,000 ft.

18,000 ft.
1,000 ft.

14,500 ft.

40 n mi

Low-altitude
VOR

1,000 ft.
High-altitude
VOR

25 n mi
12,000 ft.

1,000 ft.

TVOR

Figure 2–19. VOR service volumes.

Unusable Radials Testing of the VOR found that a clear zone of several thousand square feet around the VOR was necessary for proper operation. Any
obstruction within this area could blank out or reflect some of the signal from
the VOR and cause incorrect course information to be transmitted to the aircraft. Tall buildings located thousands of feet from the VOR transmitter could
even distort the transmitted signal. In an attempt to solve this problem, the
CAA developed the Doppler VOR (DVOR).
Although the operating principles of this VOR differ radically from a
conventional VOR, the information available to the pilot is exactly the same.
The VOR receiver on board the aircraft is unable to differentiate between
Doppler or conventional VOR transmissions. Doppler VOR is less sensitive to
reflections from buildings or terrain. In locations unsuitable for conventional
VOR installation, a DVOR might be necessary (see Figure 2–21).

66 / CHAPTER 2

Figure 2–20. VOR service volume chart.

If the DVOR fails to correct the reflections or blanking, the affected radials must be listed as unusable, which means that although the pilot may be able
to receive these radials, they are not accurate and should not be used. Unusable
VOR radials are published in the Airport Facility Directory (see Figure 2–22).
Airway
Altitudes

The CAA faced an enormous task when trying to determine where VORs
should be located. CAA planners had to consider potential obstructions, terrain, and the position of other VORs operating on the same frequency to determine that a suitable interference-free signal could be received by any aircraft
operating along a VOR-equipped airway. The airways must be constantly flight
checked. After these checks, a minimum en route altitude (MEA) is designated
for each airway. Aircraft operating at or above the MEA are guaranteed clearance above any obstruction located along or near the airway.

/

67

FAA

Navigation Systems

Figure 2–21. A Doppler VOR station.

Along some airways, if they differ from the MEA, minimum obstruction
clearance altitudes (MOCAs) are also designated (see Figure 2–23). MOCAs
are lower than MEAs and are designed to provide obstacle clearance only. In
case of an emergency, the pilot may safely descend to the MOCA and will still
be guaranteed obstacle clearance. Pilots flying at the MOCA altitude are also
guaranteed proper VOR reception as long as they are within 22 nautical miles
of the VOR. Maximum authorized attitudes (MAA) are sometimes assigned to
certain high attitude airways. An MAA is the maximum usable altitude at which
an interference free ground-based radio reception signal is assured. MAA’s are
designated for route segments where interference from another navaid operating on the same frequency is possible.
Airway
Designators

When VOR airways are designated, their identifying numbers are preceded by the letter V if they are low-altitude airways, or the letter J if they are
high-altitude airways.

Aircraft Positioning Methods
The VOR provides only bearing information to the pilot (known as rho), not
distance from the station (known as theta). There are only two ways for a
pilot using the VOR to accurately determine an aircraft’s position: using either
rho–rho or rho–theta position determination. Rho–rho position determination
requires that the pilot obtain bearing information from two different VORs.
Using airborne VOR equipment, the pilot can plot a line of position from each
VOR. These two lines of position (or radials) are then plotted on a navigation
chart, with the aircraft being located at the intersection of the two radials (see
Figure 2–24).

68 / CHAPTER 2

Figure 2–22. Unusable radials listed in the Airport Facility Director (gray screen).

Navigation Systems

/

69

MEA

MOCA

Re
ce
p
lim tion
it

Re

n
tio
ep t
c
Re limi

ce
p
lim tion
it

n
tio
ep t
c
Re limi

No reception
at MOCA

Figure 2–23. Minimum en route and minimum obstruction clearance altitudes.

360∞ Radial

270∞ Radial

VOR

VOR

Figure 2–24. Plotting aircraft position using two VORs.

70 / CHAPTER 2
The rho–rho method of position determination requires that the aircraft
be within the service volume of both VOR transmitters. These two stations
should also be at approximately right angles to each other. Since the VOR
receiver on the aircraft can legally have an accuracy of ⫾6°, this in effect makes
each radial 12° wide. The aircraft’s location will be somewhere within the area
defined by the limits of the VOR receivers’ accuracy. If the two radials do not
bisect each other at approximately right angles, the area defined by the two
radials becomes much larger, thereby making the position determination less
accurate (see Figure 2–25).
If a pilot wishes to determine an aircraft’s location using just one station,
DME Position
Determination rho–theta position determination techniques must be used. The pilot must

360∞ Radial

270∞ Radial

VOR

Aircraft’s
probable
location

VOR

Figure 2–25. Actual location of an aircraft using two VORs for position
determination.

Navigation Systems

/

71

determine on which radial the aircraft is located (rho) and then use distance
measuring equipment (DME) to determine the aircraft’s distance (theta) from
the VOR transmitter. Rho–theta position determination requires specialized
DME equipment both on the aircraft and at the VOR transmitter.
The DME system uses the principle of elapsed time measurement as the
basis for distance measurement. The DME system consists of an interrogator
located on board the aircraft and a transponder located at the ground station.
At regularly spaced intervals, the interrogator transmits a coded pulse on a
frequency of around 1,000 mHz (see Figure 2–26).
When the ground-based DME transponder receives this pulse, it triggers
a coded reply that is transmitted on a different frequency. When the interrogator receives this pulse, the elapsed range time is electronically calculated. Range
time is the interval of time between the transmission of an interrogation and
the receipt of the reply to that interrogation. The approximate range time for
a signal to travel 1 nautical mile and return is 12.36 microseconds. The DME
equipment on board the aircraft measures the elapsed time between interrogator transmission and reception of that signal. This time is divided by 12.36
microseconds, providing the distance the aircraft is from the ground station.
This determination is known as the line of sight or slant range distance.
Slant range is the actual distance between the aircraft and the groundbased DME transponder. As the aircraft’s altitude increases, the difference
between slant range and ground distance increases. For instance, if an aircraft

Interrogator

Transponder

Figure 2–26. DME operation.

72 / CHAPTER 2
is 5.0 ground miles from the DME station, at an altitude of 6,000 feet, the
DME indicator on board the aircraft will indicate approximately 5.1 nautical
miles from the station. But if the aircraft is directly over the DME station, at an
altitude of 30,000 feet, the DME indicator will also indicate about 5.1 nautical
miles (see Figure 2–27).
The difference between slant range and ground distance is most pronounced when aircraft are operating at high altitudes fairly close to the DME
ground station. This difference has been taken into consideration by the FAA
when determining holding-pattern sizes, intersection locations, and airway
positioning.
Tactical Air
Navigation
(TACAN)

The VOR-DME system has deficiencies that make it unusable for certain military operations. A conventional VOR transmitter is fairly large and needs an
extensive clear zone around it to minimize reflections. In addition, since all of
the DME interrogators on board aircraft transmit at the same frequency when
interrogating a station, a DME ground station can become saturated from too
many aircraft within its vicinity interrogating at the same time. If this happens,
the interrogator signals may interfere with one another and cause inaccurate
DME distances to be displayed in the cockpit.
After an extensive evaluation of the civilian VOR-DME system, the
Department of Defense chose to develop an alternative navigation system
known as tactical air navigation (TACAN). TACAN is a polar coordinate–based

5.1 n mi
Slant range

5
Sla .1 n m
nt r
i
ang
e

5.0 mi
DME station

Figure 2–27. DME slant range measurement.

Navigation Systems
Table 2 –1.

/

73

Radio Frequency Allocation
Name

Very low frequency

Abbreviation

VLF

Frequency

3–30

kHz
kHz

Uses

Naval communication

Low frequency

LF

30–300

Medium frequency

MF

300–3,000 kHz

NDB

High frequency

HF

3–30

mHz

Long-range communications

Very high frequency

VHF

30–300

mHz

VOR, localizers, marker
beacons, civil communications

Ultra high frequency

UHF

300–3,000 mHz

DME, TACAN, MLS,
glide slope, military
communications, GPS

Super high frequency

SHF

3–30

gHz

Radar

EHF

30–300 gHz

Extremely high frequency

LORAN, NDB

navigation system that provides both bearing and distance (rho–theta) information to the pilot using a single transmitter located on the ground. This groundbased TACAN equipment operates within the ultra high frequency (UHF) band
between 960 and 1,215 mHz (see Table 2-1). Operation in this frequency range
permits both the interrogator and the transponder to be much smaller than
conventional VOR-DME equipment. UHF frequencies are line of sight but are
not as susceptible to reflection as those in the VHF band, which reduces the
siting problems inherent in the VOR. These advantages make TACAN ideal
for use on aircraft carriers or in mobile, land-based equipment. Because of its
smaller size and ease of installation, a TACAN station is far easier to move
than a VOR station, which makes it ideal for use in hostile areas or in temporary airfields (see Figure 2–28). TACAN is seldom used by civilian aircraft.
TACAN does not use a passive transmitter on the ground like the VOR
but instead operates in much the same way as the DME system. During operation, the TACAN equipment on the aircraft (the interrogator) transmits a coded
signal to the TACAN station on the ground (the transponder). On receipt of
the interrogator signal, the transponder transmits a properly coded reply. The
interrogator on board the aircraft measures the elapsed time and calculates the
distance between the aircraft and the TACAN transmitter. (This is done in
the same manner as with civilian DME equipment.) The interrogator on board
the aircraft also decodes the signal and determines the aircraft’s azimuth from the
TACAN ground station. The airborne equipment can then display both bearing
and distance information to the pilot, using a display system similar to civilian
VOR-DME indicators.
VORTAC

While the military was developing TACAN, the CAA was developing and
implementing the civilian VOR-DME system. Congress expressed concern over

E-Systems, Montek Division

74 / CHAPTER 2

Figure 2–28. A mobile TACAN ground station.

the increased expense of developing, operating, and maintaining two separate
navigation systems when both would provide pilots with the same navigational
information. The CAA recommended adoption of VOR-DME as the civil navigation standard, since system implementation had already begun and VOR-DME
receivers were readily available at a lower cost than TACAN equipment. In
addition, the CAA believed that the VOR-DME system was more flexible, since
VOR and DME equipment could be purchased separately. The CAA preferred
a system that would permit the pilot to purchase just VOR equipment; DME
equipment could be installed in each aircraft at a later date if the pilot felt that
the expense was justified. In addition, since the CAA had previously recommended that pilots install VOR equipment and many pilots had already made
this expensive investment, the CAA felt that it would be unfair to require aircraft owners to remove their VOR equipment and install even more expensive
TACAN receivers.
The Department of Defense, however, believed that TACAN was better
suited to military operations because of its smaller size and portability. After
years of negotiations, the CAA and the Department of Defense eventually

Navigation Systems

/

75

agreed that civilian aircraft would be permitted to use ground-based TACAN
transponders to provide distance information while still using VOR ground stations for azimuth information. Military aircraft, however, would be equipped
solely with TACAN equipment and would be dependent on it for both azimuth
and distance information.
The military and the CAA agreed to place VORs and TACANs at the
same locations using common physical structures. This combined navigation
aid would henceforth be known as VORTAC.
The VORTAC system was chosen by Congress to become the nation’s
new en route navigation standard, providing both distance and bearing information to military and civilian aircraft. TACAN frequencies would be paired
with the appropriate VOR frequencies to simplify pilot operation. To use
VORTAC, all that civilian pilots needed to do was select the appropriate VOR
frequency, and the DME interrogator would automatically tune itself to the
proper TACAN UHF frequency. Military pilots using TACAN were required to
select an appropriate channel number, and their receiver automatically tuned
itself to the proper frequency.
Most of the VORs across the United States were soon colocated with
TACANs and became VORTACs (see Figure 2–29). In locations where the
military had no need for TACAN but civilian aircraft still needed some form
of navigation, a VOR with civilian DME equipment was installed. (These
VOR-DME facilities cannot be used by military aircraft unless they are VOR
equipped.) In addition, some locations justify installation of a VOR station but
not a DME station. In this case, a VOR is installed without associated DME
or TACAN equipment. Such facilities can be used for azimuth information by
aircraft equipped with VOR.

Area Navigation
To navigate the airways using the VORTAC system, pilots are required to fly
from VORTAC to VORTAC until they reach the destination airport. Because
of airport locations and VORTAC placement restrictions, it is seldom possible
to navigate in a straight line from the departure to the destination airport. This
navigation restriction forces pilots to fly a longer distance than necessary. It also
creates congestion in the air traffic control system, since every aircraft operating under an IFR flight plan is forced to navigate along a limited number of airways. In an attempt to alleviate this congestion, a number of systems have been
developed to permit pilots to bypass the airway system and navigate directly
to the destination airport. These various systems are collectively referred to as
area navigation or RNAV.
Doppler
Radar

One of the first area-navigation systems adopted for use was Doppler radar.
The Doppler radar system is composed of a radar transmitter, a receiver, a signal processor, and display unit, all installed on board the aircraft. The Doppler

E-Systems, Montek Division

76 / CHAPTER 2

Figure 2–29. A VORTAC ground station.

system constantly transmits a radar signal straight down from the aircraft at a
precise frequency. After the radar signal has reflected off the ground back to the
receiver, the signal processor compares the frequency of the transmitted signal
with that returned to the aircraft.
If the aircraft were not moving at all, no detectable change would be
noticed in the frequency of the transmitted radar signal. But when the aircraft

Navigation Systems

/

77

is moving in any direction, either longitudinally or laterally, the radar frequency
will change as it reflects off the earth’s surface. This phenomenon is called the
Doppler effect, and the change in frequency is known as a frequency shift. The
signal processor on board the aircraft measures the frequency shift and uses
this information to calculate the aircraft’s ground speed and true course. This
information is then displayed in a manner that permits pilots to navigate to
their destination.
The Doppler radar system measures only the aircraft’s relative motion
over the earth’s surface; it cannot actually determine an aircraft’s location. For
the system to operate correctly, the pilot must input the starting position of
the aircraft into the Doppler system before takeoff. Any error in this input will
cause the system to inaccurately calculate the current position of the aircraft.
This is the primary disadvantage of the Doppler radar system.
Since the Doppler system is self-contained within the aircraft, it operates without using any ground-based navigation stations (such as VORTAC
or NDB) and can be used where navigational aids are sparse or nonexistent.
This characteristic makes Doppler radar ideal over long stretches of desert
or ocean. Doppler radar is no longer one of the most accurate RNAV systems, however, and is rapidly being replaced for primary navigation by the
systems described next; if installed, it is usually used as a backup navigational
system.
Course-Line
Computers

The course-line computer (CLC) was developed to permit pilots to use existing
VORTAC stations to fly directly from one airport to another. Using rho–theta
navigation principles, the course-line computer can determine the aircraft’s
position using any VORTAC or VOR-DME station. Upon receiving the azimuth and distance information from a VORTAC station, the CLC mathematically calculates the bearing and distance from the aircraft to any desired location
and produces navigation instructions that lead the pilot to that point.
The CLC accomplishes this task by electronically creating a phantom
VORTAC station (known as a waypoint at the desired destination and then
providing bearing and distance information to that station using the aircraft’s
VOR and DME indicators (see Figure 2–30). During flight, the pilot selects
an appropriate VORTAC station and electronically “moves” it to the desired
location. The CLC then constantly obtains position information from the
VORTAC, calculates the bearing and distance to the waypoint, and displays
the course guidance information to the pilot using the course deviation indicator, (CDI) on the aircraft. Distance to the waypoint is constantly displayed on
the DME indicator.
The primary limitation to CLC-based area navigation is that the waypoint must be located within the service volume of an actual VORTAC station.
If the aircraft is not in a position to receive an accurate navigation signal from
an existing VORTAC, the CLC cannot determine the aircraft’s present location
or compute the bearing and distance to the waypoint. This limitation forces
the pilot to electronically create a sufficient number of waypoints along the
planned route of flight to permit a straight course to be flown.

ay
rw
Ai

VORTAC

Ai
rw
ay

78 / CHAPTER 2

Airway

Ra
d
DM ial
fro
E
m
fro
D
m
D

Airway

Waypoint 2

l fr
dia
Ra

Phantom
VORTAC #2

om
B

Airw
ay

VOR

DME arc from D

Waypoint 1
Radial from A

Phantom
VORTAC #1

Rad
ial fr
om
C
ay
Airw

Ai

rw
ay

VOR

Direct RNAV route
Indirect airway route

Ai
rw
ay

VOR

Figure 2–30. CLS(course-line computer)-based RNAV.

During the entire flight, the aircraft must be within reception distance of
one of the selected VORTACs, and the pilot must locate waypoints within each
VORTAC’s service volume. If the aircraft strays outside the service volume, the
CLC will be unable to receive sufficient information to provide course guidance to the waypoint. This reduces the CLC’s effectiveness over sparsely settled
terrain. CLC-based RNAV can be used over most of the continental United
States, however.
CLC-based RNAV can also be used as a navigational aid when approaching airports. Upon arriving within the vicinity of the destination airport, the
pilot can electronically move a VORTAC and place it at the center of the destination airport, simplifying instrument approach procedures. VFR pilots can

/

79

Bendix/King Division of Allied Signal Aerospace Company

Navigation Systems

Figure 2–31. A typical light aircraft RNAV system.

use CLCs to assist in navigating to airports that are not served by VORs or
NDBs. The course-line computer is one of the most common area-navigation
systems in use today and is typically called RNAV (see Figure 2–31).
LORAN

The long-range navigation (LORAN) system was initially developed as a maritime navigation system. Since LORAN stations provide coverage primarily
over the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans, where aviation navigation aids are virtually nonexistent, LORAN was eventually adapted for aviation use. LORAN
differs from most aviation navigation systems in that it is a hyperbolic navigation system, rather than a rho–theta navigation system such as VORTAC. When
using LORAN, the pilot plots multiple hyperbolic lines of position to determine
the aircraft’s position.

80 / CHAPTER 2
The LORAN-A system consists of a master station and a slave station
installed about 500 nautical miles apart. At precise intervals, the master station
transmits a coded pulse in the 1700 to 2000 kHz band. When the slave station
receives this pulse, it transmits another coded pulse on the same frequency. The
LORAN receiver on board the aircraft measures the time delay and displays
this information on an indicator. The pilot can then use this time-delay information to plot a line of position on which the aircraft is located. After plotting
the first line of position (LOP), the pilot repeats this procedure using a second
pair of stations. The second LOP will intersect with the first one, defining the
aircraft’s exact location.
LORAN-A was never designed to be used by high-speed aircraft. Since
a significant amount of time can elapse between the plotting of the first and
second LOPs, there were always inherent inaccuracies whenever an aircraft’s
position was determined using LORAN-A.
LORAN-A was operated by the U.S. Coast Guard and was decommissioned
in the 1990s. LORAN-B was a replacement system that was developed but
never made operational. LORAN-D is a short-range military version used for
pinpoint navigation. LORAN-C is the current civilian version of LORAN and
was again designed to be used primarily for maritime navigation. LORAN-C
operates on the same general principles as LORAN-A but uses a computer to
quickly and accurately plot multiple lines of position (see Figure 2–32). Since

Master

Baseline

Slave 1

Baseline

LORAN-C

Aircraft
Location

e
Lin

o

ba

fp

itio
os

d
se

on

n

ve
sla

Lin

e

ba

1

se

Slave 2

Figure 2–32. LORAN-C line of position plotting.

d

of

on

po

sit
ion
sla
ve
2

Navigation Systems

/

81

LORAN-C is primarily a marine system, most of the transmitters are still
located along the coasts of the United States and around the Great Lakes. It has
been made available to aviation users and has limited approval from the FAA
as an aviation navigation system.
LORAN-C ground stations consist of one master station (designated
as station M) and two to five slave stations (designated as stations V, W, X, Y,
and Z). This assembly of transmitting stations is known as a chain. Seventeen
LORAN-C chains are currently in operation worldwide, with nine of them
located within the United States and Canada (see Figure 2–33). At regularly
spaced intervals, the master station transmits a coded pulse at a frequency of
100 kHz. Each master station transmits its signal at 100 kHz with a unique
time interval between transmissions. This time interval is known as the group
repetition interval (GRI). Each chain of stations is identified by a unique GRI.
For example, the Great Lakes LORAN-C chain has a GRI of 89,700 microseconds and is therefore known as the GRI-8970 chain.
As each slave station receives the pulse transmitted by its own master
station, it in turn transmits its own coded signal on the same frequency. The
LORAN receiver on the aircraft receives these coded signals, identifies which
chain is being received, and measures the time difference between the master
and each of the slave-station transmissions. The computer in the receiver uses
these time differences to plot multiple lines of position. The LORAN receiver

Figure 2–33. Darker areas indicate LORAN-C worldwide coverage.

82 / CHAPTER 2

II Morrow, Inc.

can then plot up to five LOPs from each chain of stations. The LORAN receiver
on board the aircraft (Figure 2–34) then electronically determines the intersection of these LOPs and displays the aircraft’s position to the pilots as latitude–longitude coordinates or as a bearing and distance from any preselected
location.
Since all of the LORAN ground stations operate at the same frequency
(100 kHz), the airborne receiver can use the transmissions from other LORAN
chains to confirm its initial position determination. As the aircraft continues
along its flight, the LORAN receiver constantly calculates the aircraft’s new
position and uses this information to compute the aircraft’s course and ground
speed. Using this information, the pilot can program the LORAN-C receiver to
guide the aircraft to the desired destination.
The LORAN-C receiver displays course guidance and distance information in a number of different formats, all of which provide the same essential
information to the pilot. This information includes ground speed, ground track,
course to be flown, distance to the destination airport, and estimated time of
arrival.
LORAN-C is a fairly accurate navigation system but has a number of
important limitations. The radio frequencies used by LORAN are in the low
frequency (LF) band and are not line of sight, which makes it possible for
an aircraft to receive the LORAN signal at a distance of up to 1,500 miles
from the transmitter. This is usually beneficial but can sometimes prove to be
a disadvantage. During certain atmospheric conditions (usually at twilight),

Figure 2–34. A typical LORAN-C receiver.

Navigation Systems

/

83

Sk
y

wa
ve

Ionosphere

Ground wave

Surface

Figure 2–35. LORAN-C ground wave versus sky wave.

an aircraft might receive two or more distinct signals from each master and
slave station. The first signal is the ground wave, which is the signal the
LORAN receiver is designed to utilize. Under certain conditions, the LORAN
transmission may also travel into space and reflect off the ionosphere and
return to the aircraft. This secondary signal takes longer to reach the aircraft
and can confuse the LORAN receiver, since it now receives two pulses from
every transmitter (see Figure 2–35). This condition makes it impossible for
the LORAN receiver to accurately determine time delays or plot lines of
position. Under these circumstances, the receiver is designed to ignore the
transmissions from the affected chain and must be switched to an alternate
chain of stations.
LORAN stations include the transmitting equipment as well as antenna
towers, with heights ranging from 700 to 1,350 feet. Depending on the coverage area requirements, each LORAN station transmits a signal that ranges
from 400 to 1,600 kilowatts of peak signal power. The actual control of each
transmitting station is accomplished remotely from the Coast Guard Navigation Center located in Alexandria, Virginia. Each transmitted signal is monitored, and its status is constantly transmitted to navigation center personnel. If
a situation that could affect navigational accuracy is detected, an alert signal,
called a blink, is activated. A blink signal is a change in the group of eight
transmitted pulses automatically recognized by a LORAN receiver. If a blink
signal is activated, the LORAN receiver displays an appropriate warning that
the LORAN system should not be used for navigation.
It was originally envisioned that satellite navigation would supersede
LORAN, and the system might be decommissioned. With increased security
concerns since 9/11, the LORAN-C system continues to operate in the United
States and might eventually be used as a backup navigation system.

84 / CHAPTER 2
Global
Navigation
Satellite
System

The Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) is the accepted term for navigation systems that provide ground-based users with global navigation via
space-based satellite systems. GNSS transmitters are typically located on Low
Earth Orbit satellites permitting users with fairly small, inexpensive receivers to
determine their location in three dimensions (latitude, longitude, and altitude).
As long as the transmitters are within the sight line of a number of satellites, the
receivers can determine their location within a few meters or even feet.
The United States Global Positioning System (GPS), operated by the U.S.
Air Force, is the only fully operational GNSS at this time, although it is expected
that the Russian GLONASS system will be restored to full operation by 2010.
The European Union is developing its own civilian GNSS system called Galileo,
and China is developing a system called Compass. India is currently developing
its own system as well. Due to its accuracy and worldwide availability, GNSS
has been designated by ICAO as the future navigation system to meet all civil
aviation needs, including departure terminal, oceanic, en route, nonprecision
approach, precision approach, and surface navigation.

Global
Positioning
System

In 1989, the Department of Defense (DoD) launched the first production series
of GPS satellites, which were declared operational in 1993. The Federal Aviation Administration established the civil operational status of GPS in 1994.
Two years later, in 1996, the United States officially reiterated the country’s
commitment to continue broadcasting GPS signals on a worldwide basis, free
of charge for the foreseeable future.
GPS is a space-based positioning, velocity, and time system composed of
twenty-four satellites, (twenty-one operational plus three spares) in six orbital
planes. The satellites operate in circular orbits arranged so that at any one time
users worldwide are able to view a minimum of five satellites (see Figure 2–36).
GPS operations are based on the concept of ranging and triangulation from a
group of satellites in space that act as precise reference points.

Figure 2–36. Global Positioning Satellite system.

Navigation Systems

/

85

A GPS receiver measures distance from a satellite using the same travel time
as a radio signal. Each satellite transmits a specific code, called a course/acquisition (CA) code, that contains information on the satellite’s position, the GPS
system time, its clock error, and the health and accuracy of the transmitted data.
GPS satellites have highly accurate atomic clocks to calculate signal travel time.
The GPS receiver matches each satellite’s CA code with an identical code contained
in the receiver’s database. By shifting its copy of the satellite’s code in a matching
process, and by comparing this shift with its internal clock, the receiver can calculate how long it took the signal to travel from the satellite to the receiver.
The distance derived from this method is called a pseudo range because
it is not a direct measurement of distance but a measurement based on time.
Pseudo range is subject to several errors, such as ionospheric delay or time disparities between the atomic clocks in the satellites and the GPS receiver, which
the receiver can correct.
In addition to knowing the distance to a satellite, a receiver needs to know
the satellite’s exact position in space; this is known as its ephemeris. Each satellite transmits ephemeris information about its exact orbital location. The GPS
receiver uses this information to precisely establish the position of the satellite.
Using the calculated pseudo range and the position information supplied by the
satellite, the GPS receiver mathematically determines its position by triangulation (see Figure 2–37).

Figure 2–37. Satellite triangulation as used by the GPS system.

86 / CHAPTER 2
The GPS receiver needs at least three satellites with timing corrections
from a fourth satellite to yield an unaided, unique, and true three-dimensional
position (latitude, longitude, and altitude). The GPS receiver can then compute navigational values such as distance and bearing to a waypoint, ground
speed, estimated time en route, estimated time of arrival, and winds aloft. It
does this by using the aircraft’s known latitude/longitude, measuring relative movement, and referencing these to a database built into the receiver.
The receiver uses data from the best four satellites, automatically adding signals from new ones as it drops signals from others to continually calculate
its position.
Receiver
Autonomous
Integrity
Monitoring

Garmin, Inc.

The receiver (see Figure 2–38) verifies the integrity of the signals received
from the GPS constellation through receiver autonomous integrity monitoring (RAIM). RAIM is an independent means to determine whether a satellite
is providing corrupted information. At least one satellite, in addition to
those required for navigation, must be in view for the receiver to perform
the RAIM function; therefore, for RAIM to work correctly, five satellites
must be in view of the receiver. RAIM performs consistency checks
between position solutions obtained with various subsets of the visible
satellites. The receiver provides an alert to the pilot if the consistency
checks fail.

Figure 2–38. Example of a high-end, panel-mounted GPS unit.

Navigation Systems

/

87

GNSS
Augmentation

GNSS signals provide sufficient accuracy for en route and two-dimensional
navigation, but they do not provide acceptable vertical or lateral landing guidance. The standard GNSS signal needs to be augmented to provide this capability. This can be accomplished by using either a Ground-Based Augmentation
System (GBAS) or Satellite-Based Augmentation System (SBAS).
Augmentation will provide more accurate lateral guidance during
the approach and departure phases of flight and might be used in some en
route environments as well. Augmentation will also provide approach with
vertical guidance (APV), which offers pilots a positive and stabilized vertical
guidance flight path for approach procedures where no current guidance
exists.
Augmentation will likely provide APV performance levels similar to that
of today’s Category I ILS standard (200’ ceiling and ½-mile visibility). In the
future, if security concerns can be minimized and signal integrity can be maintained, Category II (100’ ceiling and ¼-mile visibility) and Category III (zero/
zero autoland) approaches might be provided as well.
SBASs comprise a network of ground reference stations that collect the satellite signals and send them to one or more ground processing
centers. The centers compare the overall signal inaccuracy from each station and compute a differential correction. This correction is sent to one
or more geostationary satellites that transmit the augmentation message to
each aircraft.
There are multiple SBASs being developed and/or in operation. One SBAS
currently operational is the U.S.-controlled wide area augmentation system
(WAAS). The European geostationary navigation overlay service (EGNOS) is
another SBAS, but it is still in an early state of operation with the hope of
becoming operational by 2010.
In the United States, the FAA commissioned WAAS for instrument flight
use in July 2003, providing approach and en route navigation across the entire
county. Avionics that utilize WAAS to provide vertical guidance during an
instrument approach are now available. WAAS-based instrument approaches
can now be performed to many airport runways.

Wide Area
Augmentation System
(WAAS)

WAAS uses a network of precisely located ground reference stations that monitor transmitted GPS satellite signals. These stations are located throughout the
continental United States, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and Alaska, with additional
stations installed in Canada and Mexico. Ground reference stations collect and
process GPS information and send it to the WAAS master station. The master
station develops a correction message that is sent to users via satellite. The
WAAS message improves the accuracy, availability, and safety of GPS-derived
position information. Using WAAS, GPS signal accuracy is improved from
about plus or minus 20 meters to approximately 2 meters both horizontally
and vertically (see Figure 2–39).

GroundBased
Augmentation System

Aircraft using GBAS receive augmentation information directly from a local
ground-based transmitter. GBAS is similar to SBAS with the exception of the

88 / CHAPTER 2

Figure 2–39. Wide area augmentation system.

system error being measured in only one local geographic area, thereby making
the augmentation differential calculation very accurate. The augmentation
message is sent only to aircraft in the local area, usually by some form of
domestic radio communication.
GBAS can easily provide Category I ILS performance and will eventually
provide Category II and Category III performance if service continuity and
integrity problems can be resolved. The FAA program for providing GBAS is
the local area augmentation system (LAAS). LAAS augments GPS within an
approximate 20- to 30-mile radius of the receiver, which is typically placed at
or near an airport. LAAS broadcasts its correction message via a VHF radio
data link from a ground-based transmitter. LAAS can yield the extremely high
accuracy, availability, and integrity necessary for Category I, II, and III precision approaches as well as ultimately providing flexible, curved approach
paths. LAAS-demonstrated accuracy is better than 1 meter both horizontally
and vertically.
LAAS is currently still in the research and development stage. The FAA is
working with industry in anticipation of the certification of the first prototype
LAAS ground station to be located in Memphis, Tennessee.

Navigation Systems

Inertial
Navigation
System

/

89

Delco Systems Operation, Delco Electronics Corporation

The inertial navigation system (INS) is similar to Doppler radar systems in
that it precisely measures any change in an aircraft’s direction of flight and
uses this information to determine position, ground speed, and the course to
be flown to the destination airport. An INS contains accelerometers that can
measure the slightest change in an aircraft’s speed or direction of flight. At
the beginning of each flight, the pilot is required to program the aircraft’s
exact location into the INS computer (see Figure 2–40). Using the information obtained from the accelerometers, the INS computer on board the aircraft determines the aircraft’s speed and direction of flight. Using this
information, the INS can calculate the course to be flown and the estimated
time of arrival. This information is then displayed to the pilot or directed to
the aircraft’s autopilot.
When used correctly, the INS is highly accurate. INS information may be
accurate to within ⫾25 miles after a transoceanic flight in excess of 14 hours.
Since the INS is independent of ground-based radio navigation stations, it can
be used by aircraft anywhere around the world. But as with Doppler radar,
pilots must be careful to correctly enter the aircraft’s initial starting position
into the navigation computer prior to depature. Since every subsequent position
determination will be made based on this initial programming, any input errors
will render all subsequent navigation information invalid.

Figure 2–40. An inertial navigation system.

90 / CHAPTER 2
In an attempt to reduce the risk of pilots erroneously programming the
INS computer, most manufacturers have designed their inertial navigation
systems to interconnect with other navigation systems on board the aircraft
(such as LORAN or VORTAC). Using the information available from these
systems, the INS can continuously examine its own calculations and determine their validity. If a gross discrepancy is noted by the INS, the pilot will
be alerted.
The INS is certified by the FAA as a primary means of en route navigation. The INS is fairly expensive and is normally found only on large, expensive
commercial aircraft or business jets.
PerformanceBased
Navigation

Required
Navigation
Performance

In 1983, ICAO formed the Future Air Navigation System (FANS) committee
to develop a strategy that would include new concepts of aircraft communication, navigation, surveillance, and air traffic management (CNS/ATM). One
of the strategies that came out of this group was performance-based navigation (PBN).
PBN is a framework for defining navigation performance requirements
to be applied to an air traffic route, instrument procedure, or defined airspace.
PBN includes both Area Navigation (RNAV) and Required Navigation Performance (RNP). With PBN, once the required performance level is established,
the aircraft’s own capability determines whether it can safely achieve the specified performance and qualify for the operation.
PBN is not a navigation system but a framework for defining a navigation
performance specification within which aircraft must comply with specified
operational performance requirements. Unlike other navigation specifications,
PBN is not equipment specific but rather establishes required performance on
the basis of defined operational needs. It is the aircraft’s own capability that
determines whether the pilot can achieve the specified performance and qualify
for the specific operation.
The FAA and industry have defined PBN specifications that can be satisfied by a range of navigation systems. PBN simply specifies aircraft system
performance requirements in terms of accuracy, integrity, availability, continuity, and functionality needed for the proposed operations. It represents a shift
from sensor-based to performance-based navigation. Performance requirements are identified in navigation specifications, which also identify the choice
of navigation sensors and equipment that may be used to meet the performance
requirements.
In the future, the FAA will describe navigation requirements in terms
of required performance instead of specific onboard navigation systems such
as VOR, GPS, etc. In the future, the international community will also likely
establish minimum performance capabilities in the areas of required communications performance (RCP) and surveillance performance (RSP).
RNP provides specifications based on demonstrated levels of navigation
performance and capabilities rather than a required set of specific

Navigation Systems

/

91

navigation equipment. ICAO defines RNP as “a statement of the navigation
performance accuracy necessary for operation within a defined airspace.”
This navigation performance accuracy is quantified with two values: a distance in nautical miles (known as the RNP type) and a probability level
(usually 95%). For example, an airplane will be certified to operate on an
RNP-4 airway if the performance of the navigation system will result in the
airplane being within 4 nautical miles of its indicated position at least 95%of
the time.
The RNP capability of an aircraft varies depending upon the equipment installed on the aircraft as well as the navigation infrastructure.
Generally, aircraft will be equipped with multi mode receivers (MMR) that
automatically select the most accurate system available and display that
information to the pilot. The aircraft can then use procedures for which the
aircraft’s navigation systems qualify. For example, an aircraft may be equipped
and certified for RNP 1.0 but may not be capable of RNP 1.0 operations
if during flight the aircraft’s navigation system detects transmitter or receiver
problems or limited navaid coverage. The onboard MMR will automatically
select from a GPS, WAAS, VOR, TACAN, ILS, or DME navigation signal to
provide the pilot with the most accurate solution set.
The best solution will be graphically presented to the pilot for navigation
use as will the RNP accuracy level. Different airspace, routes, or procedures
will have specified minimum RNP level requirements for use. ICAO has already
defined standard minimum RNP values for the four possible navigation phases
of flight: oceanic, en route, terminal, and approach. The required RNP value is
expressed as a distance in nautical miles from the intended centerline of a procedure, route, or path. The FAA has developed conforming standards, which
are specified in Table 2–2.
In special circumstances, U.S. RNP levels for specific routes and procedures might be based on the use of a specific navigational system such as GPS
or VORTAC, but generally the aircraft MMR will choose the most accurate
system.

Table 2–2.

U.S. Standard RNP Levels
RNP Level

Application

0.3 nm

LNAV approaches

1.0 nm

Arrival or departure routes

2.0 nm

En route airways

4.0 nm

Oceanic/remote areas where 30 nm lateral separation is currently
required

10.0 nm

Oceanic/remote areas where 50 nm lateral separation is currently
required

92 / CHAPTER 2
Special
Aircraft and
Aircrew
Authorization
Required

A requirement of RNP is the aircraft navigation system’s ability to continuously
monitor current navigation performance and inform the pilot if the minimum
requirements cannot be met during any specific operation. This onboard monitoring and alerting capability enhances the pilot’s situational awareness and
can enable reduced obstacle clearance and closer route spacing without intervention by air traffic control.
Some RNP operations might require additional procedures and equipment and/or specialized flight crew training before the FAA will permit their
use. This might include the addition of advanced features on the onboard
navigation system or additional approved flight training and crew procedures.
These specific instrument flight operations require FAA approval before they
can be utilized and are known as special aircraft and aircrew authorization
required (SAAAR) procedures.

Instrument Approach Procedures
The navigation systems discussed to this point are those primarily utilized for
en route navigation between airports. If, upon arrival at the destination airport,
the pilot can see the airport and safely perform an approach to the runway and
land, the pilot may use either a visual approach or a contact approach. The
specific differences between these two approach procedures will be covered
in Chapter 6. In general, a visual approach can be conducted if the visibility
is greater than 3 miles. Visual approaches can be initiated by either the pilot
or the controller. Contact approaches may be conducted whenever the visibility is greater than 1 mile. Only the pilot can initiate this type of approach. In
this chapter, both types of approaches will be generically referred to as visual
approaches.
During a visual approach, the pilot accepts the responsibility for navigating to the airport and avoiding any obstacles within the local area. When visual
approaches are being conducted, air traffic controllers are still responsible for
separating aircraft that are using them from aircraft operating on IFR flight
plans; Only the navigation is left to the pilot.
If the weather conditions at the destination airport are such that the pilot
is unable to, or chooses not to, conduct a visual approach, he or she must
conduct an instrument approach procedure (IAP). During the conduct of an
instrument approach, the pilot must follow a specified procedure that provides
course guidance and obstacle clearance. This procedure guides the pilot to the
destination airport where he or she can then make a safe landing.
Instrument approach procedures are designed and published by the U.S.
government and are made available to pilots and private corporations. When
requested by a sponsoring agency, specially trained FAA personnel accurately
determine the routes and altitudes that aircraft will fly when approaching the
airport under marginal weather conditions. These specialists use the procedures
contained in the terminal instrument approach procedures (TERPS) manual

Navigation Systems

/

93

published by the FAA. The TERPS manual specifies the criteria that must be
met before the FAA can certify an instrument approach procedure. TERPS
specialists ensure that pilots complying with a published instrument approach
procedure will avoid every obstacle in the vicinity of the approach path and
will still be able to safely land at the completion of the approach.
When the FAA specialists have finished designing an instrument approach
procedure, specially trained FAA pilots conduct flight checks in specially instrumented aircraft to ensure that the approach procedure actually meets TERPS
criteria. After this flight check, the FAA publishes the instrument approach
and permits pilots to use these procedures (see Figure 2–41). These instrument
approach procedures are actually considered Federal Aviation Regulations
(FARs), and FAR 91 mandates that pilots comply with these procedures when
conducting an instrument approach.
The National Ocean Service (NOS) and Jeppessen Incorporated (a privately
owned company) use the TERPS information to publish instrument approach
procedure charts (sometimes called approach plates) that graphically depict the
transition from the airway structure to the actual instrument approach procedure. Each publisher uses the same information when designing its charts but
presents this information differently. NOS charts are primarily used by the FAA,
Department of Defense, and general aviation pilots. Jeppessen (or JEPP) charts
are primarily used by airline, corporate, and some general aviation pilots.
Segments
of an
Instrument
Approach
Procedure

An instrument approach procedure essentially consists of four components: the
initial approach, intermediate approach, final approach, and missed approach
segments. A detailed description of each segment is provided in the TERPS
manual, available from the U.S. Government Printing Office.
Initial Approach Segment The initial approach segment is designed to transition the aircraft from the en route airway structure to the intermediate approach
segment. The initial approach segment begins at one of the initial approach
fixes (IAFs) located along the federal airways. This segment is usually defined as
a heading or a radial to fly from the IAF to the intermediate approach segment.
The initial approach segment specifies the minimum allowable altitude that
may be flown along that route. There is usually one initial approach segment for
every airway that pilots might be using as they approach the airport. The initial
approach segment terminates when it joins the intermediate approach segment.
Intermediate Approach Segment The intermediate approach segment is
designed to permit the pilot to descend to an intermediate altitude and align
the aircraft in order to make an easy transition to the final approach segment.
The intermediate approach segment terminates at the final approach fix (FAF),
which is designated on the approach chart with a maltese cross for nonprecision approaches and a lightning bolt for precision approaches. There is usually
only one intermediate approach segment for every approach. It is not ordinarily identified as such on an approach chart. The intermediate segment may
simply consist of a course to fly that leads to the final approach fix, or it may
be part of a procedure turn.

94 / CHAPTER 2

Figure 2–41. FAA form 8260: written description of a standard instrument approach procedure (NDB runway 10 approach at Lafayette,
Indiana).

Navigation Systems

/

95

45∞ Turn
45∞ Turn
Runway

Final
approach
fix

1 min.
180∞ Turn

Figure 2–42. Procedure turn.

Procedure turns are necessary whenever the heading of the initial approach
segment is nearly opposite that of the intermediate segment. A procedure turn
is a maneuver performed in a designated area of airspace where the pilot turns
the aircraft around and tracks inbound on the intermediate approach segment
(see Figure 2–42). Typically, the airspace reserved for a procedure turn includes
all of the airspace on one side of the approach course within a distance of about
10 nautical miles from the final approach fix. The pilot is authorized to use all
of this airspace when reversing course from an initial to intermediate approach
segment.
Final Approach Segment The final approach segment is used to navigate the
aircraft to the runway and properly position it to permit a safe landing. This
segment begins at the final approach fix and ends at the missed approach point
(MAP). The final approach segment guides the aircraft to the desired runway
using a navigation aid located either at the airport or nearby. The navigation
aid can be one of two general types: precision or nonprecision. A precision
approach aid provides the pilot with both lateral and vertical course guidance
to the approach end of the runway. A nonprecision approach aid provides only
lateral guidance to the pilot.
Nonprecision Approach During a nonprecision approach, upon reaching the
final approach fix the pilot descends to a predetermined minimum descent altitude (MDA) published on the instrument approach chart (see Figure 2–43). The
pilot maintains this altitude while tracking along the final approach segment
toward the missed approach point. If the runway or runway environment is
sighted prior to reaching the MAP and the pilot feels that a safe landing can be
made, he or she is legally authorized to continue the approach and land. If the

96 / CHAPTER 2

Final
approach
fix
Missed
approach
point

Intermediate
approach
segment
Minimum
descent
altitude

Missed
approach
segment
Runway

Figure 2–43. Nonprecision approach procedure using a minimum descent altitude.

runway is not in sight prior to reaching the MAP, or if a safe landing cannot be
accomplished, the pilot must transition to the missed approach segment, which
usually leads back to an initial approach fix. This is called missed approach
procedure.
Precision Approach During the conduct of a precision approach, the pilot
descends while tracking along the final approach segment. The precision
approach aid provides an electronic descent path for the pilot known as a glide
path. When the designated altitude (known as the decision height or DH) has
been reached, the pilot must determine whether a safe landing can be made
(see Figure 2–44). If, in the pilot’s opinion, it is safe to land, he or she is legally
authorized to continue the descent and land. However, if the pilot determines
that it is not safe to continue, a transition to the missed approach segment must
be made, and the missed approach procedure must be conducted.
Because of the accuracy of precision approach aids, the pilot is usually
authorized to descend to a lower altitude before making a decision about landing. This makes a precision approach much more valuable to the pilot during
periods of marginal weather. Since precision approach aids are usually more
expensive to purchase, install, and operate than nonprecision aids, they are
normally reserved for use at airports that experience a significant amount of
marginal weather conditions.
Terminal Arrival Area Criteria Most existing VOR, NDB, or instrument landing system (ILS) approach procedures require that the aircraft transition from
the en route airway structure to the instrument approach procedure using
specified ground tracks defined by ground-based navigation aids. The advent

Navigation Systems

/

97

Final
approach
fix

Intermediate
approach
segment
Missed
approach
segment

Decision
height

Runway

Figure 2–44. Precision approach procedure using a decision height.

of GNSS, coupled with the concept of free flight, means that many aircraft will
no longer fly these routes. Requiring a transition from free flight to a fixed route
structure as the aircraft nears the airport will reimpose a traffic constraint, nullifying any operational advantage offered by GNSS/free flight.
In response to the introduction of GPS navigation systems in the United
States, the FAA has begun to establish new, standardized instrument approach
configurations for use at each airport. These new criteria are defined in FAA
Order 8260, entitled Terminal Arrival Area (TAA) Design Criteria. These standardized approach procedures will be established for all new GPS approach
procedures. Most likely, any remaining non-GPS instrument approach procedure retained by the FAA will be converted similarly.
Instead of defining specific routes and altitudes that the aircraft must
use while transitioning to the GNSS-based instrument approach, TAA criteria
define one final approach, one missed approach, and three initial approach fixes
in addition to three airspace areas (see Figure 2–45). These fixes are arranged
in a T-shaped configuration.
In the example shown in Figure 2–46, aircraft approaching the airport from
the southwest would be located in airspace A and would navigate direct to the
initial approach fix (in this example, called Alpha). Aircraft approaching from
the southeast would navigate direct to Charlie, whereas aircraft approaching
in a clockwise arc from west to east (airspace B), would navigate directly to
Bravo.
To provide obstacle and terrain clearance, each airspace area extends
30 nautical miles out from its associated initial approach fix. A minimum altitude is established for each area that provides a minimum of 1,000 feet of
obstacle clearance. If a single altitude cannot be provided for a particular sector,

98 / CHAPTER 2

IAF

IF(IAF)

IAF

FAF

MAP

Figure 2–45. Basic TAA configuration.

Airspace B
Straight-In Area
Navigating to Bravo

Charlie

Alpha
Bravo

Right Base Area
Navigating to Alpha
Airspace A

Left Base Area
Navigating to Charlie
Airspace C

Figure 2–46. Standard TAA with airspace areas.

step-down areas will be developed. Instead of being fixed points in space, as they
are in current instrument approach procedures, the step-down areas will exist
as arcs centered on the appropriate initial approach fix (see Figure 2–47).
Aircraft initiate the instrument approach entering via either airspace A or
C, proceed direct to the appropriate fix (either Alpha or Charlie), and then turn
90° and fly direct to Bravo. Aircraft entering airspace B would simply proceed
direct to Bravo. These three flight segments are the initial approach segments.
The length of these segments will be between 3 and 10 miles, depending on the
speed of the aircraft that typically use this approach. Any aircraft required to
hold would do so at Bravo. Holding at the final approach fix would no longer
be a common procedure. Procedure turns would also become a thing of the

Navigation Systems

/

99

180∞
30 NM
210∞
6000'
2000'
4700'

22 NM
20 NM
090∞

270∞
4100'
3000'
17 NM

17 NM

6000'

6000'

30 NM

30 NM

360∞

Figure 2–47. A sectorized TAA with step-down arcs.

past. If any form of course reversal were required, it would be accomplished at
the 5-mile holding pattern depicted at Bravo.
The intermediate segment exists from Bravo to the final approach fix. An
altitude will be established that provides the aircraft with 1,000 feet of vertical
clearance from all obstructions during this narrow segment. This segment terminates at the final approach fix. At that point, the pilot would fly the approach
to the missed approach point just like any other approach. The approach could
be a nonprecision GPS approach, or if some form of vertical guidance were
provided, the pilot would conduct a precision instrument approach. In most
procedures, the missed approach procedure will require the aircraft to turn
either right or left, returning to either Alpha or Bravo where the approach will
recommence.
The plan is that this new configuration will become the new standard for
every existing and newly developed instrument approach procedure. This will
provide a standardized configuration that permits direct flight to the beginning
of every approach, thereby increasing efficiency and no longer tying aircraft to
fixed, inflexible routes and altitudes while still providing safe separation and
transition to the instrument approach (see Figure 2–48).

NC-1, 12 FEB 2009 to 12 MAR 2009

Figure 2–48. RNAV GPS runway 27R approach at Grand Forks, North Dakota.

NC-1, 12 FEB 2009 to 12 MAR 2009

100 / CHAPTER 2

Navigation Systems

/

101

Approach Navigation
Aid Classiﬁcations
Many en route navigation aids can be used as nonprecision approach aids if
their transmitted signal is of a high enough quality and can be safely used during the entire instrument approach procedure. FAA flight-check aircraft routinely check the quality of these navigation aids to determine their suitability
as approach navigation aids. An en route navigation aid used for an instrument
approach is classified as a nonprecision aid since no vertical guidance is provided to the pilot. The following en route navigation aids have been certified
by the FAA for use as nonprecision approach aids:
VOR

RNAV

VOR-DME
VORTAC

INS

TACAN

GPS

NDB

LNAV
LNAV/VNAV
LPV

Since these are primarily en route navigation aids, they may not be properly
positioned to serve the needs of each airport within their immediate vicinity.
Responding to a need for additional approach aids, the FAA has developed an entire series of radio navigation devices to serve solely as instrument
approach aids. The main ones in use are precision approach aids since they
provide vertical guidance to the runway. The nonprecision aids are designed to
be used at airports that are served by en route navigation aids but that do not
qualify for the installation of a more expensive precision approach navigation
aid. The instrument approach aids currently being installed and used by the
FAA include the following:
Terminal VOR (TVOR)

Terminal VOR

nonprecision

Instrument landing system (ILS)

precision

Localizer directional aid (LDA)

nonprecision

Simplified directional facility (SDF)

nonprecision

Microwave landing system (MLS)

precision

Precision approach radar (PAR)

precision

Airport surveillance radar (ASR)

nonprecision

The terminal VOR (TVOR) was designed to provide an inexpensive method of
providing VOR guidance to an airport needing an instrument approach. A terminal VOR is a low-powered version of a standard VOR that is usable to a
distance of 25 nautical miles. The TVOR does not provide distance information

102 / CHAPTER 2
unless a civilian DME is colocated at the facility. Terminal VORs are not normally combined with TACANs.
Instrument
Landing
System

The instrument landing system (ILS) is designed to provide the pilot with an
approach path that is perfectly aligned with the runway centerline. An ILS
provides both lateral and vertical guidance to the pilot (see Figure 2–49).
The ILS system is equipped with three different types of transmitters: the
localizer, the glide slope, and two or three marker beacons.
Localizer The localizer system consists of a transmitter building, localizer
antenna, and monitoring equipment (see Figure 2–50). Typically, the localizer
antenna is located about 1,000 feet beyond the departure end of the runway
being served by the ILS. The transmitter building is about 300 feet to one side
of the localizer antenna. On older installations, the monitoring equipment is
mounted on wooden posts a short distance in front of the antenna array. In
newer installations, it is an integral part of the antenna. The localizer operates
within the VHF band between 108.10 and 111.95 mHz (see Figure 2–51).
The localizer provides the pilot with lateral course guidance information
only. The antenna radiates a signal that is aligned with the runway centerline
and is modulated with two different tones: 90 and 150 Hz. The final approach
course is produced as a result of the radiation patterns emanating from the
antenna array. The array is situated such that the 150 Hz tone is predominant
on the right side of the runway while the 90 Hz tone predominates on the left
(see Figure 2–52).
Along the centerline, both tones are of equal strength. An aircraft to the
right of the centerline will receive predominantly the 150 Hz tone. The airborne
receiver will detect this condition and move the vertical needle of the ILS indicator to the left of center, thereby advising the pilot to alter the aircraft’s course
to the left. If the aircraft is to the left of course, the 90 Hz tone will dominate
and the vertical needle of the ILS indicator will move to the right, advising the
pilot to alter the aircraft’s course to the right. If the aircraft is established on
course, the 90 and the 150 Hz tones will be of equal strength and the vertical
needle on the ILS indicator will be centered (see Figure 2–53).
The localizer signal is transmitted along a fairly narrow path extending
35° to the left and right of the runway centerline and out from the transmitter to a distance of 10 nautical miles. Between 10 and 25 nautical miles from
the runway, the localizer is certified to be accurate within a range of only 10°
on either side of the extended centerline. The localizer signal is approximately
7° high.
The ILS receiver on the aircraft is designed such that when the vertical
needle on the indicator is fully displaced on one side or the other (known as
full-scale deflection), the aircraft is 3° off course. Since the localizer is an angular
device, the on-course beam narrows as the aircraft approaches the antenna. Ten
miles from the end of the runway, a full-scale deflection indicates that the aircraft
is about a half mile off course. When crossing the approach end of the runway,
3° off course translates to approximately 300 feet.

SE-4, 12 FEB 2009 to 12 MAR 2009

SE-4, 12 FEB 2009 to 12 MAR 2009

Figure 2–49. ILS runway 2 approach at Eastman, Georgia.

103

Michael Nolan

104 / CHAPTER 2

Figure 2–50. An ILS localizer antenna installation.

The localizer is one of the most precise and sensitive navigation aids available for instrument approaches. Unfortunately, the localizer signal can be easily
reflected off terrain, buildings, aircraft, vehicles, and power lines, thereby creating course scalloping or false courses (see Figure 2–54). When an ILS is initially
being installed, the localizer radiation pattern is carefully studied to ensure that
nearby buildings and power lines will not unduly interfere with the accuracy

Navigation Systems
/

105

Figure 2–51. Graphic depiction of an instrument landing system.

106 / CHAPTER 2

Approach direction

Runway centerline

Predominately
150 Hz
Runway

Back

Front

course

course
Localizer antenna
Predominately
90 Hz

On course

Bendix/King Division of Allied Signal Aerospace Company

Figure 2–52. ILS approach procedure and the localizer radiation pattern.

Figure 2–53. A typical
light aircraft ILS receiver.

of the transmission. However, a strong signal reflected off a nearby object will
create a change in the radiation pattern of the localizer and artificially “move”
the localizer centerline to the left or right.
If this situation is encountered, FAA technicians attempt to solve the
problem by installing a different type of localizer antenna. In some cases, even
this remedy will not solve the reflection problem and the localizer must be
relocated. It may be possible to move the antenna off the runway centerline or

Navigation Systems

/

107

150 Hz
Localizer
antenna

Equal signal
strength

Runway

Reflection
90 Hz

Building

Figure 2–54. Example of localizer reflections that result in course scalloping.

redirect the final approach course somewhat. If either of these modifications is
necessary, the localizer is no longer considered to be part of an ILS and is called
a localizer directional aid (LDA) (see Figure 2–55).
This name change is necessary to alert pilots that the localizer is not
aligned with the runway centerline. When a localizer is offset in this manner,
vertical guidance is not normally provided, making an LDA-based instrument
approach a nonprecision approach. The conversion of a localizer to an LDA
is done only as a last resort, since an LDA procedure requires pilots to make a
low-altitude turn to line up with the runway just prior to landing.
Airway facility technicians employed by the FAA are responsible for
ensuring that reflections from terrain, buildings, and power lines do not disturb
the localizer transmission. It is the air traffic controller’s responsibility to ensure
that aircraft and vehicles do not interfere with the localizer transmission whenever ILS approaches are in progress. To prevent any inadvertent reflections,
localizer critical areas have been established for every localizer antenna. Each
localizer installation is unique and may not have the same critical area, but in
general the standard localizer critical area is shaped as in Figure 2–56.
Other than aircraft landing and exiting the runway, aircraft conducting
the missed approach procedure, or aircraft using the runway for departure and
flying over the localizer antenna, no vehicles or aircraft are allowed within the
localizer critical area when ILS approaches are in progress. When weather conditions are extremely poor (such as visibility below 1/2 mile or ceilings below
200 feet), no aircraft or vehicles are allowed in the critical area for any reason
when an aircraft is inside the final approach fix during an ILS approach. The
exact criteria to be followed concerning localizer critical areas are covered in
Chapter 6 and can be found in the Air Traffic Control Handbook.
The localizer transmission is radiated in a pattern that can be received
from both the approach and the departure ends of the runway. The front
course of the localizer is the transmission that serves as the primary instrument approach. The localizer back course is a mirror image of the front course,

NE-3, 12 FEB 2009 to 12 MAR 2009

NE-3, 12 FEB 2009 to 12 MAR 2009

108 / CHAPTER 2

Figure 2–55. LDA/DME runway 19 approach at Ronald Reagan Washington National.

Navigation Systems

/

109

2,000 ft.

20
0

200 ft.

ft.

200 ft.
Localizer
antenna
Hold line

Figure 2–56. Localizer critical area.

serving the opposite runway, with the 90 and 150 Hz areas reversed. At certain ILS installations where the back course transmission meets TERPS criteria, the FAA has been able to establish localizer back course approaches (see
Figure 2–57).
When a pilot conducts a back course approach, the 90 Hz signal dominates the right side of the final approach course, whereas the 150 Hz signal
dominates the left. Because this is the exact opposite of the front course, a pilot
conducting a back course approach can become disoriented. If an aircraft on an
ILS back course is to the right of the runway centerline, the localizer indicator
will advise the pilot to “fly right.” If the aircraft is to the left of the centerline,
the indicator will advise the pilot to “fly left.” This is the opposite to what
the pilot should do if the aircraft is to remain on the back course centerline.
This condition is known as reverse sensing. The pilot must remember to do
the opposite of what the localizer indicator advises. Certain ILS indicators are
equipped with a back course switch that reverses the localizer needle operation
during back course approaches.
Glide Slope The glide slope radiates a signal pattern that provides an electronic glide path to be flown by the pilot. The glide slope system provides both
above and below glide path indications to the pilot, using a horizontal needle
on the ILS indicator (see Figure 2–58). The glide slope transmitting system consists of a transmitter building, the glide slope antenna, monitor antennas, and
a clear zone. The glide slope antenna and the transmitter building are about
500 feet from the runway centerline and about 1,000 feet from the approach
end of the runway.

110 / CHAPTER 2

EC-3, 12 FEB 2009 to 12 MAR 2009

EC-3, 12 FEB 2009 to 12 MAR 2009

Figure 2–57. Localizer back course runway 14L approach at Champaign, Illinois.

Navigation Systems

/

111

One dot deflection

3°–10°

5°–10°

2°–5°
normally 2–1/2°

Airport

Height to 10 times exaggerated

Figure 2–58. ILS glide slope indications.

The glide slope operates in the UHF band between 329 and 335 mHz
and is paired to the localizer frequency. When a pilot selects the proper localizer frequency, the glide slope frequency is also selected by the ILS receiver.
The glide slope transmits a UHF signal modulated at 90 and 150 Hz just like
the localizer. If an aircraft is above the glide path, the 90 Hz signal will predominate and the horizontal needle on the aircraft’s ILS indicator will move down,
advising the pilot to “fly down.” If the aircraft is below the desired glide path,
the 150 Hz signal will predominate and the ILS needle will move up, advising
the pilot to “fly up.” If the aircraft is on the correct glide path, the horizontal
needle will be in the middle, signalling ON GLIDE PATH.
To properly transmit the glide slope with a single antenna would require
an antenna 50 to 100 feet tall. Since an obstruction at this height next to
an active runway is completely unacceptable during periods of low visibility,
a number of methods have been tried in an attempt to decrease the antenna’s height. The method currently used requires that the glide path signal be
reflected off the ground directly in front of the antenna. This area is known as
the glide slope reflecting area. This solution reduces the height of the antenna

112 / CHAPTER 2
mast to about 30 feet (see Figure 2–59). Since the glide slope antenna is highly
directional, there is no back course to a glide slope.
A number of other problems are inherent in the current glide slope
method of transmission. One such problem is the creation of false glide paths.
At most glide slope installations, the desired glide path angle is about 3° above
horizontal. However, when the glide slope bounces off the ground, a number
of additional glide paths are also created. Fortunately, none of these false glide
paths is lower than 3°, but many exist above this level. The first false glide path
usually occurs at an angle of about 9°.
To ensure that the correct glide path is used by pilots conducting an ILS
approach, it is imperative that the aircraft be allowed to transition from the
airway structure to the ILS at an altitude that will place the aircraft below any
of the false glide paths.
Any obstruction directly in front of or to the side of the glide slope transmitter might reflect some of the signal and cause glide slope scalloping. To
prevent this, an area directly in front of the glide slope antenna has been designated the glide slope critical area (see Figure 2–60). When aircraft are conducting ILS approaches, this area must be kept clear of aircraft, vehicles, deep
snow, or any objects that may interfere with the correct operation of the glide
slope transmitter.
Another of the problems inherent in bouncing the glide slope is that
extensive site preparation is needed to ensure that the ground in the reflecting
area will properly reflect the glide slope at the desired approach angle. If the
area in front of the antenna does not offer the proper reflectivity, it may have to
be resurfaced, which is usually expensive. Many factors can temporarily change
the reflectivity of this zone. Water-soaked ground, excessive snow, or extremely
long grass can all cause the glide slope to reflect at the wrong angle. To ensure
proper glide slope operation, receivers called glide slope monitors are located
within the clear zone. If these monitors detect that the glide slope radiation
pattern is no longer within established tolerances, the glide slope transmitter is
automatically shut down.
Marker Beacons Marker beacons are located at known distances along the
final approach course of the ILS to provide position information to pilots conducting the approach. Marker beacons transmit a cone-shaped signal on a frequency of 75 mHz, uniquely coded to identify each type of beacon.
Outer marker (OM) beacons are usually located on the ground about
5 miles from the approach end of the runway (see Figure 2–61). When a properly equipped aircraft flies over an outer marker, a blue light flashes and a
400 Hz series of continuous dashes is emitted from the marker beacon receiver
on board the aircraft (see Figure 2–62).
The middle marker (MM) is usually about 3,000 feet (or half a mile) from
the approach end of the runway and causes an amber light to flash and a series
of 1,300 Hz dots and dashes to be heard in the cockpit. The middle marker is
usually located such that an aircraft properly positioned on the glide slope will

Michael Nolan

Navigation Systems

Figure 2–59. An ILS glide slope antenna installation.

/

113

114 / CHAPTER 2
1,200 ft. or end of runway,
whichever is greater

Hold line

200 ft.
Glide slope antenna

27 R

250 ft.
to
600 ft.

Figure 2–60. Glide slope critical area.

overfly it at approximately 200 feet. This is the normal decision height for a
Category I ILS approach.
If a Category II ILS has been installed, an inner marker (IM) is placed
approximately 1,000 feet from the end of the runway. The inner marker is
located at the point where an aircraft on the glide slope passes through an altitude of 100 feet. This is the decision height for a Category II ILS approach. The
inner marker causes a white light to flash and a 3,000 Hz series of continuous
dots to be heard in the cockpit.
Compass Locators At many ILS installations, a low-powered nondirectional
beacon (NDB) may be colocated with either the outer or the middle marker.
Such nondirectional beacons assist the pilot when transitioning from the airway structure to the ILS. An NDB used for this purpose has a transmitter power
of less than 15 watts and is known as a compass locator. Combining a compass
locator with an outer marker (OM) creates a facility known as a locator outer
marker (LOM). When colocated with a middle marker, the facility is known
as a locator middle marker (LMM). Since the increased use of radar in the terminal environment has diminished the need for compass locators, the FAA has
begun to decommission the few existing locator middle markers and will install
locator outer markers only where operationally necessary.

Navigation Systems

/

115

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

Figure 2–62. A typical light aircraft marker beacon receiver.

ILS Distance Measuring Equipment In rare instances, distance measuring
equipment may be installed at the localizer site to provide distance information to an aircraft conducting an ILS approach. DME is usually used when the
local terrain precludes the installation of 75 mHz outer or middle markers.
The proper DME frequency is automatically selected when the pilot tunes in
the appropriate localizer frequency. DME-equipped aircraft can then use this
distance information in place of the marker beacons.
ILS Categories ILS systems are currently classified into one of three categories, each category being defined in terms of minimum visibility and decision

116 / CHAPTER 2
Table 2–2.

ILS Categories
ILS Category

Decision Height

Visibility or RVR

I

200 feet

1⁄2 mile or 2,400 feet †

II

100 feet

1,200 feet †

IIIa

*

700 feet †

IIIb

*

150 feet †

IIIc

*

‡

*No decision height specified. Visibility is the only limiting factor.
†
No fractions of miles authorized when determining visibility. The runway served by the ILS
must have operable RVR equipment.
‡
No ceiling or visibility specified. Aircraft must be equipped with automatic landing equipment.

height altitudes (see Table 2–2). Minimum visibility is measured in fractions of
a mile when measured by human observers or in hundreds of feet when measured by a runway visual range.
The standard ILS is a Category I, which provides accurate guidance information in visibilities as low as 1/2 mile and ceilings as low as 200 feet. These
minima are representative of a standard ILS installation.
With a slight change in the ground equipment, an ILS installation may
be certified as a Category II, which permits a properly rated pilot to use
the ILS in visibilities as low as 1,200 feet or ceilings as low as 100 feet (see
Figure 2–63). The additional equipment required for a Category II installation includes more stringent localizer and glide slope monitoring equipment,
an inner marker, and additional approach lighting. Pilots and aircraft must
be certified to use a Category II ILS and its associated minima. Those pilots
not certified to Category II minima may still use a Category II ILS down to
Category I minima.
In those locations that qualify, a Category III ILS may be installed (see
Figure 2–64). A Category III ILS installation is much more expensive since it
requires completely redesigned localizer and glide slope equipment. Category
III ILS approaches are of three types: IIIa, IIIb, or IIIc. Category IIIc approaches
may be conducted when the ceiling or visibility is zero! Aircraft conducting
Category III approaches must be equipped with autoland devices that automatically land the aircraft. Category III installations are rarely justified for use
in this country. Few airports need this type of approach and few aircraft are
equipped to utilize them.
Runway Visual Range Runway visual range (RVR) equipment measures the
visibility along the runway being used for instrument approaches. The RVR
system consists of a transmissometer projector, a transmissometer detector, a
data converter, and a remote digital display.
In a typical RVR installation, the transmissometer projector and the
transmissometer detector are located to the side of the runway, approximately

Navigation Systems

117

EC-2, 12 FEB 2009 to 12 MAR 2009

EC-2, 12 FEB 2009 to 12 MAR 2009

/

Figure 2–63. ILS runway 5R (CAT II) approach at Indianapolis, Indiana.

118 / CHAPTER 2

EC-3, 12 FEB 2009 to 12 MAR 2009

EC-3, 12 FEB 2009 to 12 MAR 2009

Figure 2–64. ILS runway 14R (CAT III) approach at Chicago O’Hare International.

Navigation Systems

Detector

/

119

Projector

Figure 2–65. Runway visual range operation.

500 feet apart (see Figure 2–65). The projector emits a known intensity of
light, which is measured by the detector. Any obscuring phenomenon, such as
rain, fog, smoke, or haze, will reduce the light intensity received by the detector. The light intensity measurement is transformed by the data converter into
a visibility value measured in feet. This resultant value is then presented to the
controllers using the remote digital display.
The data converter adjusts the visibility value to approximate the visibility that will be observed by a pilot conducting an approach to the runway. The
data converter must take into consideration such variables as time of day and
the runway light intensity.
The RVR equipment is normally located at about the midpoint of the
runway in order to provide service for pilots approaching the runway from
either direction. At busier runways, two or even three RVR systems may be
installed to provide accurate visibility measurement throughout the runway’s
length. These three RVR installations are called the touchdown, midpoint, and
rollout RVRs.
Simpliﬁed
Directional
Facility

At some locations where the installation of an expensive ILS cannot be justified
but where the existing navigation aids are unsuitable for the development of
an instrument approach, a simplified directional facility (SDF) may be installed.

120 / CHAPTER 2
An SDF provides course guidance similar to but less accurate than the localizer
component of an ILS. An SDF transmitter broadcasts in the same frequency
range as the ILS (108.10–111.95 mHz), with a signal modulated at 90 and
150 Hz. An SDF approach does not provide glide path information. Marker
beacons and compass locators may be used as part of an SDF approach.
The SDF final approach course may not be aligned with the runway and is
wider than an ILS localizer. SDFs are usually much cheaper and easier to install
and maintain than an ILS and are well suited for smaller airports or for use as
a secondary approach at an airport already equipped with an ILS.

GPS-Based Instrument Approaches
The GPS approach overlay program permits pilots to use GPS to fly certain
designated nonprecision instrument approach procedures. These procedures
are identified by name, and the phrase “or GPS” is then added to the title.
For example, “VOR/DME or GPS RWY 27L”.
As the development of stand-alone GPS approaches has progressed,
many of the original overlay approaches have been replaced with stand-alone
procedures specifically designed for use by GPS systems. The title of these
procedures will have only the GPS navigation system in the title. For example,
“GPS RWY 24”.
GPS
Approach
Waypoints

GPS approaches make use of two types of navigational fixes or waypoints.
These are called either fly-by or fly-over waypoints. Fly-by waypoints are used
when an aircraft should begin a turn to the next course prior to reaching the
waypoint that separates the two route segments. In most cases, when properly
flown, the aircraft will not actually cross over the waypoint but will instead
start the turn early so as to smoothly intercept the next leg of the approach
procedure. This is known as turn anticipation and is compensated for in the
airspace and terrain clearance calculations. Many of the waypoints in a GPS
approach, except the missed approach and the missed approach holding waypoints, will typically be fly-by waypoints.
Fly-over waypoints are used when the aircraft must fly over the point
prior to starting a turn. These waypoints are used when it is imperative that
the aircraft actually cross the point defined by the waypoint. Approach charts
depict fly-over waypoints as a circled waypoint symbol.
Since GPS receivers are designed to always fly to the next waypoint, in
contrast to VOR receivers that are designed to navigate both to and from VORs,
GPS procedures must be designed such that the aircraft is always navigating
to a defined point. To facilitate these waypoint identifications, a new system of
identifiers was created.
With this new system, any point used for the purpose of defining the
navigation track of an aircraft is called a Computer Navigation Fix (CNF).
The FAA has begun to assign five-letter names to CNFs and to chart these on

Navigation Systems

/

121

various aeronautical charts. CNFs are not to be used for any air traffic control
application, such as holding or re-routing of aircraft, but are names assigned to
waypoints that can be included in the aircraft’s internal navigational database.
To distinguish them from conventional reporting points, CNF names on charts
will be enclosed in parenthesis.
In most cases, CNF names will be unique, with the exception of some waypoints associated with the runway itself. For example, some runway threshold
waypoints, which are generally the beginning of the missed approach segment,
may be assigned a unique, five-letter identifier, but they may also be coded with
a runway number such as “RW36L”.

Approach and Landing Procedures
There are three basic types of instrument approaches currently in use in the
national airspace system.
• Nonprecision approaches (300–500 minimum altitude—1–mile visibility)
• Category I approaches (200’ minimum altitude—1/2–mile visibility)
• Category II/III approaches (100’ or less minimum altitude—zero to1/4–mile
visibility)

Nonprecision approaches provide only lateral (horizontal) electronic
guidance and typically provide guidance to a point 300 to 500 feet above the
runway with minimum required visibilities of 1 mile or greater.
Category I approaches provide vertical guidance in addition to lateral
navigation and typically provide guidance to a point 200 to 300 feet above the
runway with visibilities of a 1/2 mile to 1 mile required.
Category II and III approaches provide vertical guidance as well, to less
than feet above the ground with visibilities of less than a 1/2 mile required. All
procedures based on satellite navigation will eventually replace these three different categories. These new categories will similarly be defined by their navigational accuracy. These new approach categories include the following:
• Lateral Navigation (LNAV) approach—similar to the traditional nonprecision
approach.
• Lateral Navigation/Vertical Navigation (LNAV/VNAV) approach—similar to
the traditional non–precision approach with the addition of vertical guidance.
LNAV/VNAV will provide pilots with minimums close to, but not quite as low
as, the Category I ILS currently in use.
• Localizer Performance with Vertical Guidance (LPV)—provides highly accurate
lateral and vertical guidance and includes appropriate runway and approach
lighting. LPV approaches using WAAS will provide Category I ILS capability.
Enhanced augmentation, such as LAAS, might provide Category II and/or
Category III capability in the future.

122 / CHAPTER 2
Lateral
Navigation
(LNAV)

LNAV is the new terminology for a GPS nonprecision approach. The approach
minimums for LNAV are similar to other nonprecision approaches in that
RNAV (either GPS or other compatible area navigation equipment) will be
used to provide lateral guidance. Aircraft conducting an LNAV approach will
still descend incrementally to a minimum altitude and level off rather than follow a fixed glidepath. The pilot will navigate using RNAV to a missed approach
point where either a safe landing can be accomplished or a missed approach
must be conducted.
LNAV is considered a nonprecision approach (no vertical guidance) with
a minimum altitude of about 250 feet above obstacles along the flight path.
At many airports, LNAV approaches will provide procedures with similar or
lower minimums than existing VOR or NDB approaches.

Approaches
with Vertical
Guidance

With the development of a means of providing calculated vertical guidance
information, in comparison to an actual transmitted glideslope, a new class of
approach procedures, which provide calculated vertical guidance, have been
developed. These new procedures are called Approach with Vertical Guidance
(APV) procedures and have been adopted internationally.

Lateral
Navigation/
Vertical
Navigation
(LNAV/VNAV)

LNAV/VNAV approaches provide the pilot with vertical guidance calculated by the GPS receiver. Due to the increased accuracy of GPS, LNAV/
VNAV approaches typically have minima lower than LNAV-only
approaches. LNAV/VNAV will provide the pilots with a vertically guided
approach with a decision altitude about 250 to 350 feet above the runway.
Visibility requirements are generally 1 mile at airports without approach
lighting systems.

Localizer
Performance
with Vertical
Guidance
(LPV)

Approaches that combine the augmented navigation capabilities of WAAS,
EGNOS, or LAAS with appropriate runway and approach lighting will be
known as localizer performance with vertical guidance (LPV) approaches.This
procedure should provide for approach criteria very similar to that provided
by Category I ILS systems. (Decision altitudes as low as 200’ above touchdown
with visibility minimums as low as 1/2 mile). At this time, the implementation
of LAAS is still being studied. If LAAS is fully implemented, it might be possible to provide LPV approaches similar to that now provided by Category II
and III ILS systems. In theory, obstacle problems notwithstanding, it is theoretically possible to develop LPV approaches for many airports across the
country. It is likely that many, if not all, ILS systems could be decommissioned
at that point. It is being suggested that as a backup system, many busy airports
might keep one ILS system operational even with the advent of LPV. If LAAS
is not implemented nationwide, Category II and III ILS systems might need to
be retained.

Navigation Systems

/

123

Runway and Approach Lighting
When night flying was first introduced, most airports consisted of an open area
covered with either turf or cinders. Pilots could land in whichever direction
they chose. Rotating beacons provided the pilots with the general location of
the airport but did not provide sufficient visual cues to permit them to actually
locate the cinder area and land. This problem was solved through the introduction of airport boundary lighting, previously described in this chapter.
In the late 1930s, because of the increased weight of aircraft that were
being introduced into service, most of the airports began to construct concrete
runways to replace the cinder landing surfaces. These runways were usually
about 1 mile long and about 100 feet wide. Since each airport had only two or
three runways, airport boundary lighting no longer satisfactorily assisted the
pilot in locating the runway at night. A different type of lighting needed to be
developed.
Runway
Lighting

Runway Edge Lights Many different types of runway lighting systems were
examined, including runway floodlights and neon lights. After numerous
experiments by both civilian and military aviation authorities, it was eventually agreed that runway edge lights should be the standard type of runway
lighting.
Runway edge lights are placed on either side of the runway, spaced
approximately 200 feet apart, outlining the edges of the runway. These lights
are usually placed on short metal poles to elevate them from any obstruction
such as long grass or drifting snow. Runway lights are white and are usually
covered with a Fresnel lens (see Figure 2–66). Fresnel lenses are designed to
focus the emitted light, concentrating it along and slightly above the horizontal
plane of the runway’s surface.
The lights installed on the last 2,000 feet of runways used for instrument approaches use lenses that are half white and half amber. These lights
appear amber to a landing pilot, warning that the far end of the runway is fast
approaching. The ends of the runway are clearly designated through the use
of runway threshold lights, which are similar to runway lights but use red and
green split lenses. As the pilot approaches the runway to land, the threshold
lights on the near end of the runway appear green, while those on the far end
of the runway appear red.
Runway light systems are normally operated from the control tower and
are turned on during nighttime hours and during daylight whenever the visibility is less than 2 miles or at the pilot’s request. Whenever the control tower
is not in operation, the lights are either left on or are operated using pilotcontrolled lighting (PCL) systems. PCL systems permit pilots to switch on the
lights by pressing their microphone switch a number of times in rapid succession, producing an audible click on the control tower frequency. The number
of clicks controls both the operation and the intensity of the runway lighting

Michael Nolan

124 / CHAPTER 2

Figure 2–66. A typical runway Fresnel light installation.

system. For more information about pilot-controlled lighting systems, consult
the Aeronautical Information Manual.
Runway Light Intensity Runway light systems are classified according to
the brightness they are capable of producing. Low-intensity runway lighting
(LIRL) is the least expensive to install and is typically equipped with 15-watt
bulbs that operate on one intensity level. This intensity level is known as
step one.
The standard type of lighting for a runway used for instrument
approaches is medium-intensity runway lighting (MIRL). Medium-intensity lights are similar in construction to low-intensity lights but are usually
equipped with 40-watt bulbs. MIRL can be operated on three intensity levels:
step one, step two, and step three. When operated on step one, mediumintensity lights produce the same light level as low-intensity lights (15 watts).
When functioning on step two, they operate at about 25 watts, and on step
three they operate at the maximum-allowable 40-watt level. During normal
operation, medium-intensity lights are usually set to step one. This intensity
is increased whenever the pilot requests or when the visibility drops below
3 miles.
Runways that are heavily used during periods of low visibility may be
equipped with high-intensity runway lighting (HIRL). High-intensity runway
lights operate on five steps ranging from 15 watts to 200 watts. High-intensity

Navigation Systems

/

125

lights are operated on step one until the visibility begins to decrease below
5 miles. At that point, higher intensities are used, with step five being reserved
for periods when the visibility is less than 1 mile.
Embedded-in-Runway Lighting Runways that are used extensively during
periods of low visibility may be equipped with an assortment of embedded
runway lights that provide the pilot additional visual cues when landing. These
systems include touchdown zone lighting, runway centerline lighting, and taxiway turnoff lighting.
During periods of very low visibility, the runway edge lighting does not
provide the pilot with sufficient visual cues to properly land the aircraft. In
the 1950s, when ILS was initially being installed, various pilot groups complained that landing in these conditions was like landing in a black hole. They
reported that during the last few seconds of the approach, as they were raising the aircraft’s nose for landing, the runway edge lights were too far apart
to provide an accurate altitude reference. In an attempt to provide additional
visual cues during this critical phase of landing, a new supplemental lighting
system was developed, known as touchdown zone lighting. Touchdown zone
lights are embedded in the runway and extend from the landing threshold
to a point 3,000 feet down the runway. Touchdown zone lights use 100- to
200-watt bulbs and are placed in sets of three, on both sides of the runway
centerline. Touchdown zone light intensities are stepped up in conjunction
with the runway edge lights.
In conditions of reduced visibility, runway edge lights do not provide
sufficient directional guidance information to enable pilots to accurately steer
their aircraft along the center of the runway. To assist the pilot, many airports
have installed runway centerline lights. Centerline lights are similar to touchdown zone lights but are placed along the entire centerline, at 75-foot intervals.
Runway centerline lights are bidirectional: in the first part of the runway, the
lights are white, while the last 1,000 feet of centerline lights are red; in the
2,000 feet preceding the red lights, the centerline lights alternate red and white
to warn pilots that the runway end is approaching. Runway centerline lights
are also varied in intensity in proportion to the setting chosen for the runway
edge lights.
When visibility is reduced, many pilots find it difficult to identify the
intersecting taxiways for exiting the runway. Runway utilization rates are
reduced as pilots taxi slowly, trying to find the proper turnoff. To reduce this
taxi time, some airports have installed taxiway turnoff lights, which are similar to centerline lights but are used to delineate the path that the pilot should
use for exiting the runway. Taxiway turnoff lights are inset into the runway’s
surface and are spaced at 50-foot intervals. These lights are colored green and
extend from the runway centerline to the proper intersecting taxiway.
Large airports may have a myriad of taxiways, runways, and vehicular paths that all look similar to a pilot unfamiliar with the airport. To assist
these pilots, taxiway edge lighting systems have been developed. Taxiway edge
lights are similar to runway edge lights but operate at reduced wattage and

126 / CHAPTER 2
are equipped with blue lenses. Taxiway centerline lights are green. Taxiway
lights may operate at different intensity levels and are usually operated from
the control tower.
Approach
Lighting
Systems

One of the most complex tasks facing pilots occurs near the end of an instrument approach, when they make the transition from instrument to visual flying.
During this transition, they must locate the runway and properly maneuver the
aircraft for landing within seconds. In conditions of low visibility, a pilot may
be able to see only about 2,000 feet ahead of the aircraft. In today’s modern
jets, this distance can be covered in less than 20 seconds. Within this short time,
the pilot must locate the runway, determine the aircraft’s position, make any
necessary adjustments in flight attitude, and then land the aircraft. Without
some form of visual assistance, this task is virtually impossible to perform
safely in so short a time.
These problems were noted as early as 1932 by officials from the airlines
and the Bureau of Air Commerce. Experiments were conducted as early as
1935 in an attempt to simplify the transition from instrument to visual flight
during an approach. These experiments led to the construction of a number of
different types of approach lighting systems. Approach lights are placed along
the extended centerline of the runway and usually extend from the runway
threshold out to a point where the pilot might make the transition from instrument to visual flying. Approach lighting systems are designed to provide the
pilot with visual cues that will permit accurate aircraft control during the final
approach and landing phase of the flight.
Experimental Systems The first experimental approach lighting system consisted of three high-intensity incandescent lights placed approximately 500 feet
apart along the extended centerline of a runway at the airport in Newark, New
Jersey. Later experimental systems installed at the airport included neon bar
lights and 1,500-foot rows of incandescent lights.
Additional experiments were conducted at the airports in Indianapolis, Indiana, and Nantucket, Massachusetts. In 1945 the CAA, Army Air
Corps, and Navy Department agreed to join efforts to establish the Landing
Aids Experiment Station (LAES) at the Naval Air Station at Arcata,
California, where most of the pioneering research in approach lighting was
conducted.
Opinions differed about the requirements and the configurations for
approach lighting systems. The military services preferred a system that did
not lie along the extended centerline of the runway. Military officials felt that
the area directly below the aircraft should remain clear of obstructions during
the final phase of the approach. They preferred approach lights to be placed
to the left, to the right, or on both sides of the aircraft.
The CAA, on the other hand, preferred to place the approach lights
directly under the aircraft. Although this system created a slight obstruction
problem, it did not require pilots to look out their side window to see the

Navigation Systems

/

127

Michael Nolan

approach lights. An approach lighting system along the centerline of the runway would permit pilots to concentrate directly ahead of the aircraft, which
would simplify runway detection and make it easier to note any changes in
aircraft altitude or attitude.
By 1953, each organization had selected a different system as its standard. The CAA selected a centerline system, known as Configuration A. The
Air Force and the Navy chose systems known, respectively, as Configuration
B and Configuration C. In 1958, after years of discussion, the Department of Defense agreed to cease building any additional Configuration
B and C systems and to use Configuration A approach lighting in all
new installations.
The CAA configuration consisted of a series of high-intensity white
lamps placed five abreast, extending from the runway threshold out to a
distance of 2,400 to 3,000 feet (see Figure 2–67). These light bars were
spaced 100 feet apart. At a point 1,000 feet from the end of the runway,
a triple set of light bars provided the pilot with both roll guidance and a
definite, unmistakable distance indication. The threshold of the runway was
delineated with a series of four red light bars and a continuous line of green
threshold lights.
To provide for identification of the approach lighting system, a highintensity strobe light was placed on each of the light bars that extended beyond

Figure 2–67. A typical approach light installation.

Michael Nolan

128 / CHAPTER 2

Figure 2–68. A typical high-intensity approach light.

the 1,000-foot mark (see Figure 2–68). These strobe lights flashed in sequence,
at a rate of two times per second, and appeared to the pilot as a moving ball
of light leading to the runway. These sequenced flashing lights (SFL) are also
referred to by the slang name “the rabbit.” This combination approach lighting
system became the standard for runways equipped with Category I ILS and is
known as approach lighting system type 1 or ALSF-1.
When Category II and III ILSs were being developed, it was realized
that an improved approach lighting system was necessary. During Category
II approaches, the pilot may be required to transition to visual references during the last 15 seconds of flight. Category III approaches permit the pilot even
less time to make this transition. In response, the FAA developed an improved
approach lighting system known as approach lighting system type 2, or ALSF-2
(see Figure 2–69).
ALSF-2 is similar to ALSF-1 but includes additional lighting during the
last 1,000 feet. A supplemental set of white light bars is located 500 feet from
the runway threshold to provide the pilot with an additional distance indication. Red light bars are also placed on both sides of the centerline, providing
pilots with aircraft roll guidance during the last 1,000 feet.
ALSF-2 approach lighting systems are wired such that the additional lights
can be switched off whenever Category I ILS approaches are being conducted

Navigation Systems

ALSF-2

Landing threshold

Landing threshold

Steady-burning
red lights
Steady-burning
white lights
Sequenced
flashing lights
Threshold
lights

2,400 ft./3,000 ft.

1,000 ft.
2,400 ft./3,000 ft.

129

1,000 ft.

ALSF-1

/

Figure 2–69. ALSF-1 and ALSF-2 installations.

and appear as ALSF-1 systems. The system is operated in the ALSF-2 configuration only when the pilot requests or when the visibility decreases below
¾ mile.
Both the ALSF-1 and ALSF-2 systems are similar to high-intensity runway
lighting systems in that they can be set to one of five intensity steps. Step five,
the brightest, is used only during periods of extremely low visibility.
Simplified Approach Lighting Systems Both the ALSF-1 and the ALSF-2
systems are expensive to install, operate, and maintain. This expense can be
justified only at airports that use this type of equipment routinely. At most airports, a smaller, less expensive system can provide pilots with the same benefits
as these larger systems.
Some runways are located such that identification of the extended runway centerline is difficult. If extensive instrument approaches are not being
conducted to that runway, a full approach lighting system may be economically unfeasible. It is usually more practical to simply install the sequenced
flashing lights and let them guide pilots to the runway end. When installed in

FAA

130 / CHAPTER 2

Figure 2–70. High-intensity approach lighting system. (FAA)

this manner, SFLs are usually spaced 200 feet apart and are known as runway
alignment indicator lights (RAILs).
At some locations, a full-length (3,000-foot) approach lighting system
is unnecessary. For many, the FAA has chosen to install a version of ALSF-1
that is only 1,200 feet long. This system utilizes the same high-intensity white
approach lights as the ALSF-1 system, but they are spaced at 200-foot intervals.
This is known as the simplified short approach lighting system (SSALS) (see
Figure 2–70).
In most of these locations, runway alignment indicator lights are also
installed out to a distance of 2,400 feet. In this configuration, the system is
known as the simplified short approach lighting system with RAIL (SSALR)
(see Figure 2–71). Most ALSF-1 and ALSF-2 systems are wired such that they
can operate as SSALR systems during periods when low-visibility approaches
are not conducted.
The FAA has begun to place a smaller approach lighting system at
most airports that do not routinely conduct a large number of low-visibility
approaches. This system is designed to include most of the important components available in the ALSF and SSALR systems but reduces the installation,
operating, and maintenance expenses.
This system, known as the medium-intensity approach lighting system
with RAIL (MALSR), operates with only three steps of intensity, using medium-

Navigation Systems

SSALS

Landing threshold

Landing threshold

1,000 ft.

200 ft.

1,400 ft.

2,400 ft./3,000 ft.

1,000 ft.
1,400 ft.
3,000 ft.

RAIL

131

200 ft.

SSALR

/

Steady-burning
white lights
Sequenced
flashing lights
Threshold
lights

Figure 2–71. SSALR and SSALS installations.

intensity white lamps. MALSR systems extend 2,400 feet from the runway
threshold, with the light bars spaced at 200-foot intervals. MALSR systems
operate on step one through step three, with step three being equivalent in
intensity to step three on an ALSF system (see Figure 2–72). MALSR is now the
U.S. standard for precision approach lighting.
VFR
Approach
Lighting
Systems

At airports in densely populated areas, it may be extremely difficult for a pilot
flying VFR to identify the location of the runways. Thus, it may be necessary to
provide pilots with a positive means of locating the runways. If the area is particularly noise sensitive and pilots are required to fly a specific flight path to the
runway, it may also be necessary to delineate the approach flight path. Two
types of identifier lights have been developed for these purposes: runway end
identifier lights and omnidirectional approach lights.
Runway End Identifier Lights Runway end identifier lights (REILs) provide
pilots with rapid and unmistakable identification of the end of the runway. REIL
units are located on both sides of the approach end and are synchronized to flash
together two times per second. Each light is unidirectional, is pointed approximately 15° away from the centerline, and flashes with an intensity of 600 watts
(see Figures 2–73 and 2–74). Some REIL units are single step, whereas others
may be three step and connected to the runway light-intensity controller.

132 / CHAPTER 2
MALSR

1,400 ft.

1,000 ft.

200 ft.

Landing threshold

2,400 ft.

Medium steady-burning
white lights
Sequenced
flashing lights
Threshold
lights

RAIL

Figure 2–72. MALSR installation.

REIL

Landing threshold

Landing threshold

15°

Landing threshold

10°

Figure 2–73. ODALS, LDIN, and REIL installations.

15°

10°

Landing threshold

1,500 ft.

Typical distance
3,000 ft. to 5,000 ft.

LDIN

300 ft.

ODALS

360° Flasher
Sequenced
flashing lights

Navigation Systems

/

133

Figure 2–74. A typical runway end identifier light installation.

Omnidirectional Approach Lighting System Omnidirectional approach lighting systems (ODALSs) are used to delineate the flight path that should be used
by a pilot approaching a specific runway. The lights are installed in groups, are
omnidirectional, and flash in sequence. ODALSs may be installed directly in
front of the runway or may be placed miles from the airport, under the proper
flight path. ODALSs are also being used experimentally to delineate VFR flight
paths in congested areas.
Vertical Guidance Systems The previously described systems were primarily
designed to provide lateral guidance to the pilot, with vertical guidance being
provided by an electronic glide path. At night, or during periods of reduced
VFR visibility, pilots are deprived of many of the visual cues used to determine
the proper glide path. Without these cues, pilots may be unable to correctly
orient their aircraft during the final approach phase and may misjudge their
distance, glide angle, or rate of descent. Any miscalculation of one of these factors may cause the pilot to incorrectly approach the runway and collide with
obstructions in the approach path or land at an excessive speed and roll off the
end of the runway. Since it is financially impractical to install an electronic glide
path at every runway across the United States, an inexpensive method of glide
path indication was necessary.
After extensive evaluation at the National Aviation Facilities Experimental Center (NAFEC) in Atlantic City, New Jersey, in 1960 the FAA introduced
the visual approach slope indicator (VASI) system. VASI lights are designed to

Michael Nolan

134 / CHAPTER 2

Figure 2–75. A typical VASI light installation.

be installed on runways with or without ILS approaches and can provide pilots
with accurate glide path information as far as 20 miles from the runway. The
VASI system uses either two or three light units arranged to provide the pilot
with a visual glide path. These light units are next to the runway, with the first
located approximately 700 feet and the second approximately 1,200 feet from
the approach end (see Figure 2–75).
Each VASI unit provides a narrow beam of light filtered such that the
upper portion (above the glide path) of the beam is white and the lower portion (below the glide path) is red. Pilots looking at a VASI light know that the
aircraft is too high if they see a white light and too low if they see a red light.
The two VASI units are installed such that a pilot on the desired glide path is
above the near VASI (the white beam) but below the far VASI (the red beam). A
pilot who is too high will see the white light from both units, whereas the pilot
who is too low will see the red beams from both (see Figure 2–76).
The glide path provided by the standard two-light VASI system is of
insufficient altitude for large aircraft (such as DC-10s and 747s) conducting
approaches to the runway. At airports frequented by these types of aircraft,
a third light bar is installed farther down the runway. Pilots of these aircraft
use the middle and far VASI units, and pilots of small aircraft use the near and
middle VASI units.

Navigation Systems

135

/

Cockpit View

The glide path area is
approximately 97 feet deep at
4 nautical miles from threshold

White

White

White

e
/whit
Pink
hite
Red/w k
in
Red/p

27

Glide

ite

wh

ite/

Wh

slope

Light bars

Glide slope

1/2∞

1/2∞

1/2∞
1/2∞

White

27

Red

White

Red

White

27

Red/red

Too low

Ground level
Runway threshold
Downwind bar
VASI reference point
Upwind bar

Red

Red

Red

27

Red

Figure 2–76. VASI operation.

High
(more than
3.5°)

Slightly high
(3.2°)

On glide path
(3°)
White
Red

Slightly low
(2.8°)

Low
(less than
2.5°)

Figure 2–77. PAPI operation.

Precision Approach Path Indicator The VASI system is highly effective but can
be difficult to use since the pilot must constantly observe light units that are separated by up to 1,000 feet. A similar system, the precision approach path indicator (PAPI), has been developed that remedies this situation (see Figure 2–77).
PAPI units are similar to VASI units but are installed in a single row. Each
light unit emits a white and a red beam but at progressively higher angles. If
the pilot is more than half a degree above the desired flight path, all the light
units will appear to emit white light. But as the pilot descends to a lower angle,
the system is designed so that the pilot will begin to see red light emitted from

136 / CHAPTER 2
the unit nearest to the runway. When half the lights are red and the other half
are white, the pilot is on the desired glide path, which is usually 3°. If the pilot
descends below this glide path angle, additional light units will be observed as
red. If all the light units appear red, the pilot is in excess of half a degree below
the desired glide path and should begin to climb immediately.

KEY TERMS
airport boundary lighting
airspeed indicator
airway facility technicians
ALSF-1
ALSF-2
altimeter
approach lighting systems
approach plates
area navigation (RNAV)
artificial horizon
attitude indicator
autoland
automatic direction finder (ADF)
chain
clear zone
colored airways
compass deviation card
compass locators
contact approach
course
course deviation indicator (CDI)
course-line computer (CLC)
course scalloping
crosswind correction angle
crosswinds
data converter
decision height (DH)
deduced (dead) reckoning
deviation
direction finder (DF)
Doppler effect
Doppler radar
Doppler VOR (DVOR)
false courses
false glide paths
final approach fix (FAF)
final approach segment
flight check

four-course radio range
frequency shift
Fresnel lens
front course
full-scale deflection
glide path
glide slope
glide slope critical area
glide slope monitors
Global Navigation Satellite
System (GNSS)
ground track
ground wave
group repetition interval (GRI)
heading indicator
high-altitude VORs
high-intensity runway lighting
(HIRL)
homing
hyperbolic navigation system
inertial navigation system (INS)
initial approach fixes (IAFs)
initial approach segment
inner marker (IM)
instrument approach procedure
(IAP)
instrument approach procedure
charts
intermediate approach segment
interrogator
Landing Aids Experiment Station
(LAES)
Lateral Navigation (LNAV)
Lateral Navigation/Vertical
Navigation (LNAV/VNAV)
line of sight
local area augmentation system
(LAAS)

localizer
localizer back course
localizer back course approaches
localizer critical area
localizer directional aid (LDA)
Localizer Performance with
Vertical Guidance (LPV)
locator middle marker (LMM)
locator outer marker (LOM)
long-range navigation (LORAN)
LORAN-A
LORAN-C
low-altitude VORs
low-intensity runway lighting
(LIRL)
magnetic compass
magnetic heading
magnetic north
marker beacons
master station
medium-intensity approach
lighting system with RAIL
(MALSR)
medium-intensity runway lighting
(MIRL)
middle marker (MM)
minimum descent altitude (MDA)
minimum en route altitude
(MEA)
minimum obstruction clearance
altitude (MOCA)
missed approach point (MAP)
missed approach procedure
missed approach segment
Multi mode Receiver (MMR)
multi trade receiver (MTR)
National Ocean Service

Navigation Systems
nondirectional radio beacon
(NDB)
nonprecision approach
omni bearing selector (OBS)
omnidirectional approach
lighting system (ODALS)
outer marker (OM)
Performance-Based Navigation
(PBN)
phantom VORTAC
pilot-controlled lighting (PCL)
pilotage
precision approach
precision approach path indicator
(PAPI)
procedure turn
pseudo range
radial
range time
Receiver Autonomous Integrity
Monitoring (RAIM)
remote digital display
Required Navigation
Performance (RNP)
reverse sensing

runway alignment indicator lights
(RAILs)
runway centerline lights
runway edge lights
runway end identifier lights
(REILs)
runway threshold lights
runway visual range (RVR)
sectional charts
sequenced flashing lights (SFL)
service volumes
simplified directional facility
(SDF)
simplified short approach lighting
system (SSALS)
simplified short approach lighting
system with RAIL (SSALR)
slant range distance
slave station
special aircraft and aircrew
authorization required
(SAAAR)
taxiway edge lighting
taxiway turnoff lights
terminal instrument approach
procedures (TERPS)

137

terminal VORs (TVORs)
touchdown zone lighting
transmissometer detector
transmissometer projector
transponder
true course
true heading
true north
turn and bank indicator
turn coordinator
Ultra high frequency (UHF)
variation
very high frequency (VHF)
visual approach
visual approach slope indicator
(VASI)
visual aural range (VAR)
visual navigation
VORTAC
waypoint
wide area augmentation system
(WAAS)
wind correction angle
world aeronautical charts (WACs)

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. What are the differences between sectional and world aeronautical charts?
2. What is the difference between “dead reckoning” and pilotage?
3. What are the operating limitations of NDB, VOR, RNAV, LORAN, and GNSS?
4. What is the purpose of each segment of an instrument approach procedure?
5. What are the basic principles of the instrument landing system?
6. What are the basic principles of operations of both WAAS and LAAS?
7. What are the limitations of the GNSS?
8. What are the functions of runway edge, embedded, and approach lighting systems?
9. How do LNAV, LNAV/VNAV, and LPV approches differ?

/

3
Air Trafﬁc Control System Structure
Checkpoints
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Identify which aircraft are separated by the ATC system.
2. State the differences among classes of airspace.
3. Describe the purpose of a departure procedure (DP).
4. Deﬁne the function of positive controlled, controlled, and uncontrolled
airspace.
5. Describe the services offered to pilots in each airspace class.
6. Describe operations under special VFR.

Air Traffic Control System Structure

/

139

Airspace Classification
The airspace above the United States has been categorized by the FAA into different classes, with specific requirements and different operating rules for each.
The intent of the classification scheme is to provide maximum pilot flexibility
with acceptable levels of risk appropriate to the type of operation and traffic
density within that class of airspace. Different airspace classifications and rules
permit the FAA and other national agencies to provide varying levels of security
and control.
In general, the classification scheme is designed to provide maximum separation and active control in areas of dense or high-speed flight operations. In
areas of light traffic, if acceptable weather conditions exist, pilots can provide
much of the needed traffic separation themselves.
General
Categories
of Airspace

The airspace classification scheme essentially provides four general categories
of airspace.
• The first category is one in which ATC separates all aircraft, whether IFR or
VFR, known as positive controlled airspace (PCA).
• The second category is airspace in which ATC separates IFR aircraft but,
weather permitting, VFR pilots provide their own separation, generally known
as controlled airspace.
• The third category is airspace within which the pilots provide all separation,
known as uncontrolled airspace.
• The fourth and final category is airspace within which there are special
operating restrictions and rules; known as special use airspace.

Positive Controlled Airspace Within positive controlled airspace, the FAA
either absolutely prohibits VFR flight operations, or if permitted, separates both
VFR and IFR aircraft. PCA is reserved for either very high-altitude flights at or
above 18,000 feet mean sea level (MSL) or around high-density airports.
Controlled Airspace Within airspace generally designated as controlled airspace, which is most but not all of the airspace overlying the continental United
States, ATC separation services are provided to IFR aircraft by the FAA. IFR
aircraft are authorized to fly into clouds or areas of reduced visibility and
are provided ATC assistance to remain separated from other IFR aircraft. IFR
aircraft, when operating in areas where weather conditions and traffic density
permit other aircraft to be safely observed and avoided, are still responsible for
separating themselves from VFR aircraft. VFR aircraft operating in controlled
airspace are also responsible for separating themselves from all other aircraft.
VFR flight operations are permitted so long as the weather conditions are sufficient to enable pilots to “see and avoid” other aircraft.

140 / CHAPTER 3
Uncontrolled Airspace In uncontrolled airspace, ATC separation services are
not provided by the FAA. Whether IFR or VFR, all aircraft must provide their
own separation, regardless of the weather conditions.
Special Use Airspace Special use airspace has been designated by the FAA as
airspace where activities that must be confined to specific areas are conducted
or where restrictions must be imposed on nonparticipating aircraft. Some special use airspace, such as prohibited and restricted areas, are regulatory special
use airspace and are established and described in FAR Part 73.
Other areas, such as warning, military operations, alert, and controlled
firing areas, are nonregulatory special use airspace that has been described in
FAA Order 7400.8, Special Use Airspace. Special use airspace can lie within
either controlled or uncontrolled airspace and can potentially affect both IFR
and VFR aircraft.
Controlled
versus
Uncontrolled
Airspace

One of the primary differences between airspace types is that air traffic control
separation services can be offered only to pilots operating in controlled airspace. Additional services, such as traffic advisories and safety alerts, can be
offered to aircraft flying in uncontrolled airspace but only on a workload permitting basis.
Early in this century, most of the airspace above the United States
was designated as uncontrolled. Only the federal airways and the airspace
around very busy airports were controlled. But as air traffic increased,
and the technical air traffic control capabilities of the federal government
improved, additional segments of the nation’s airspace have been designated
as controlled airspace. The only uncontrolled airspace left in the domestic
United States exists below 1,200 feet above ground level (AGL) away from
busy airports.
Various names for these airspace categories and the rules for operation
within each area have evolved as they were created. In time, due to the unique
development of ATC within the United States, the names and rules of operation
within each area became inconsistent with ICAO standards in use throughout
the rest of the world. By 1992, the FAA identified and created operational rules
for close to twenty different categories of airspace.

Airspace
Review

In 1982, in an effort to standardize and simplify U.S. airspace, the FAA and
representative industry groups formed the National Airspace Review (NAR)
committee to begin a comprehensive review of the nation’s airspace system. In
conjunction with an ICAO review commission, the NAR committee recommended that airspace over the United States be reclassified into one of six
classes. These recommendations were accepted by the FAA, and implementation began in 1993. These categories of airspace are known as Class A, B, C, D,
E, and G airspace. Class F airspace exists as an ICAO classification, with no
equivalent existing in the United States.
As currently defined, Class A, B, C, D, and E airspace is generally a form of
controlled airspace. Class G airspace is designated as uncontrolled. In general,

Air Traffic Control System Structure

/

141

Figure 3–1. Sample flight plan form.

Class A airspace is the most restrictive, where ATC provides maximum services
and separation. Class G airspace, on the other hand, is the least restrictive, and
few ATC services are provided. Class B, C, D, and E airspace spans the range
of services. Special use airspace as defined by the FAA does not follow specific
ICAO as such and is peculiar to U.S. airspace.
IFR Flight in
Controlled
Airspace
(Class A, B, C,
D, and E)

Within controlled airspace, air traffic controllers are required to separate IFR
aircraft and participating VFR aircraft using the procedures specified in the Air
Traffic Control Handbook. (These procedures are discussed in detail in
Chapters 7 and 9.) Since VFR aircraft may be permitted to operate in areas of
controlled airspace (sometime without contacting ATC), it remains the responsibility of IFR pilots to see and avoid these aircraft, regardless of the services
being provided by the air traffic controller.
Before beginning an IFR flight in controlled airspace, the pilot is required
to file a flight plan (see Figure 3–1) with the FAA and receive a clearance from
an ATC facility. A general aviation or corporate pilot usually files the IFR
flight plan with a flight service station specialist, using the Internet or telephone, and the information is then forwarded to the air route traffic control
center (ARTCC) with jurisdiction over the departure airport. Airline flight
plans are typically filed directly with the FAA using stored flight plan information. If a pilot needs to file a flight plan while airborne, the ATC facility
in contact with the pilot transmits the flight plan information to the proper
ATC facility.

142 / CHAPTER 3
The information required on a flight plan includes the following:
1. Type of flight plan. This will be VFR, IFR, or DVFR (which is a special type of
VFR flight plan used if an aircraft is entering, leaving, or transiting U.S. airspace).
2. Aircraft identification number. This is either the aircraft’s assigned serial
number, if it is a general aviation or corporate flight, or the airline call sign and flight
number.
3. Aircraft type and navigation equipment installed on the aircraft. The aircraft
type is abbreviated, using the codes found in the Air Traffic Control Handbook.
An expanded list is included in the Appendix to this book. Examples of these
abbreviations include the following:
Aircraft

FAA Identifier

Airbus A-380-800

A388

Beech 200 King Air

BE20

Boeing 737-900

B739

Cessna Citation 650

C650

Cirrus SR-22

SR22

Diamond DA-42

DA42

Embraer EMB-190

E190

Gates Learjet 55

LJ55

General Dynamics F16 Falcon

F16

Piper PA-28 Warrior

P28A

The pilot must also identify the navigational capabilities of the aircraft by
appending a unique suffix code to the aircraft type. The equipment codes are
found in the handbook. The aircraft type is separated from the equipment code
with a slash. The equipment codes are as follows:
Suffix

Equipment Capability

NO DME
/X

No transponder

/T

Transponder with no Mode C

/U

Transponder with Mode C
DME

/D

No transponder

/B

Transponder with no Mode C

/A

Transponder with Mode C
TACAN ONLY

/M

No transponder

/N

Transponder with no Mode C

/P

Transponder with Mode C

Air Traffic Control System Structure

Suffix

/

143

Equipment Capability

AREA NAVIGATION (RNAV)
/Y

LORAN, VOR/DME, or INS with no transponder

/C

LORAN, VOR/DME, or INS, transponder with no
Mode C

/I

LORAN, VOR/DME, or INS, transponder with Mode C
ADVANCED RNAV WITH TRANSPONDER
AND MODE C

/E

Flight Management System (FMS) with DME/DME and
IRU position updating

/F

FMS with DME/DME position updating

/G

Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS), including
GPS or Wide Area Augmentation System (WAAS), with
enroute and terminal capability

/R

Required Navigational Performance (RNP). The aircraft
meets the RNP type prescribed for the route segment(s),
route(s), and/or area concerned
REDUCED VERTICAL SEPARATION
MINIMUM (RVSM)

/J

/E with RVSM

/K

/F with RVSM

/L

/G with RVSM

/Q

/R with RVSM

/W

RVSM

4. The aircraft’s cruising true airspeed in knots.
5. The abbreviation for the departure point. This is normally the departure airport
but can be an en route fix.
6. The proposed time of departure.
7. The pilot’s requested cruising altitude.
8. The requested route of flight. This must include the airway and navigation
aid identifiers. The entire route of flight must be specified. When changing from
one airway to another, the intersection fix must be specified. If no airway is being
used, only the navaids need to be specified. For example, the route ALB J37
BUMPY J14 BHM would be interpreted as departing Albany, New York, flying
via Jet Route 37 until reaching the BUMPY intersection, transitioning to Jet
Route 14 at BUMPY intersection, then flying via Jet Route 14 to the destination
which is Birmingham, Alabama. The route ALB BHM would be interpreted as
departing Albany and flying in a straight line (direct) to the destination airport at
Birmingham.
9. The destination airport.

144 / CHAPTER 3
10. The estimated time en route in hours and minutes.
11. Any pertinent remarks.
12. Fuel on board the aircraft expressed in hours and minutes.
13. The pilots selected alternate airport if on an IFR flight plan and if required by
the appropriate FARs.
14. Name and address of the pilot in command.
15. Number of people on board.
16. Color of the aircraft.
17. Contact information at destination airport.

Air Traffic
Control
Clearance

The flight plan is then filed and processed by the FAA. A VFR flight plan is kept
as a record for possible search and rescue if the aircraft is reported lost or overdue. An IFR flight plan is processed and an air traffic clearance is generated.
Pilots operating IFR in the air traffic control system must then be issued a clearance by ATC prior to beginning their flight. This clearance must include the following information and should be communicated to the pilot in this sequence:
1. Aircraft identification. Sample phraseology: “Cherokee five one four papa
uniform,” “United seven thirty-one,” “JetBlue fifteen forty-three.”
2. Clearance limit. This is the farthest location to which the aircraft is cleared
to fly. Although the clearance limit is typically the destination airport, it may be
an intermediate navigation aid or intersection located along the route of flight. If
the clearance limit is not the destination airport and the pilot does not receive an
additional clearance before reaching the clearance limit, the aircraft will enter a
holding pattern at that point. (“Cleared to the Lafayette Purdue University Airport,”
“Cleared to the Boiler VOR,” “Cleared to the Staks intersection.”)
3. Departure procedure. If the assigned route of flight does not begin at the
departure airport, it is necessary for the controller to assign a departure procedure
(DP) so that the aircraft can intercept the route of flight. Departure procedures may
also be used to ensure that the aircraft avoids areas of obstructions or high-density
traffic. Departure procedures direct the pilot to turn or fly a particular heading or
route. If a particular departure instruction is routinely issued to most of the departing
aircraft, it may be incorporated into and published as a charted DP (see Figures 3–2
and 3–3). DPs are constructed by the FAA and are published and sold by the same
agencies that publish instrument approach charts. Routine use of DPs relieves
controllers from repeating the same departure clearance to every aircraft. If a DP is to
be used in a departure clearance, the controller assigns the DP procedure by simply
including its name in the clearance. (“After departure, turn left heading three five
zero,” “After departure, fly runway heading,” “O’Hare one departure.”)
4. Route of flight. The route of flight issued includes any airways or VOR radials
that the pilot will use when navigating to the clearance limit (“Via victor two fiftyone,” “Via direct Danville,” “Via the Boiler one eight five radial and the Danville
zero niner radial.”). The route of flight must include at least two fixes (departure and
arrival airports) and the route to be flown between each fix. Intermediate fixes along
the route to be flown are not routinely included as part of the clearance. The only time
an intermediate fix is included in a clearance is when the fix defines a transition from
one route to another (see Figure 3–4).

Air Traffic Control System Structure

Figure 3–2. Standard departure procedure (vector) for Atlanta Airport.

/

145

146 / CHAPTER 3

Figure 3–3. Departure procedure (pilot navigation) for Alton, Illinois.

Air Traffic Control System Structure

/

BOILER
115.1 BVT 98

13

158

186

5

BV

V3

BVT V7 P
OTES

T
BV

ZOFRI

99

V3

VH

99

POTES

P

V2

V1

28

4-

12

V9
7

ZI
PP
Y

OCKEL

VH

P0

8

V9

JAKKS
VH

T

17

VH

P

7

P

V2

4-

12

V7

8-

39

9

JELLS
ZIPPY

31
1

RD
BRICKYA
110
P
H
116.3 V

Figure 3–4. Sample route of flight.

017

ADVAY

147

148 / CHAPTER 3
5. Altitude assignment. The controller should attempt to issue the pilot an altitude
that conforms to the procedures contained in the ATC handbook. The proper use
of such altitudes will organize the flow of traffic and reduce the hazard of midair
collisions, since each aircraft operating at the same altitude will be traveling in
roughly the same direction. If circumstances require that a different altitude be issued
to an aircraft, the controller is permitted to assign a nonstandard altitude, but advance
coordination with adjacent ATC facilities must be accomplished, advising the next
controller that the aircraft is not at the proper altitude. Table 3–1 provides handbook
guidelines for altitude assignment.

When issuing clearances, a controller should never assign an altitude lower
than the minimum en route altitude (MEA). The controller should also attempt
to assign an altitude as close as possible to that filed in the original flight plan.
To meet these two requirements, the controller may assign a sequence of crossing altitudes that will ensure that the aircraft is never below the MEA. These
altitude instructions should be issued to the pilot in the order that they will be
flown. If an altitude lower than an en route MEA is assigned initially, the pilot
should be told the expected final altitude and when that altitude assignment
can be expected. In case of radio failure, the pilot will remain at the assigned
altitude until the time has elapsed and will then climb to the higher altitude.
(“Maintain six thousand,” “Maintain four thousand until Danville, then maintain six thousand,” “Maintain niner thousand. Cross Danville at or above five
thousand,” “Maintain four thousand; expect six thousand one zero minutes
after departure.”)

Table 3–1.

Guidelines for Altitude Assignment
Aircraft
Operating

On course
Degrees
Magnetic

Assign

Below 3,000
feet above
surface

Any course

Any altitude

At and below
FL 410

0 through
179

Odd cardinal altitude or flight
levels at intervals of 2,000 feet

3,000, 5,000,
FL 310, FL 330

180 through
359

Even cardinal altitude or flight
levels at intervals of 2,000 feet

4,000, 6,000,
FL 320, FL 340

0 through
179

Odd cardinal flight levels at
FL 450, FL
intervals of 4,000 feet beginning 490, FL 530
with FL 450

180 through
359

Odd cardinal flight levels at
FL 430, FL
intervals of 4,000 feet beginning 470, FL 510
with FL 430

Above FL 410

Examples

Air Traffic Control System Structure

/

149

6. Holding instructions. If it is necessary to hold an aircraft over a particular fix
while en route to the destination airport, the following information must be included
in the holding instructions (see Figures 3–5 and 3–6).
• The direction of holding from the fix, using the eight points of the compass:
north, northeast, east, southeast, and so on.
• The name of the holding fix.

Abeam
Holding side
Outbound

Fix end
Reciprocal

Outbound end

Inbound
Fix

Nonholding side

Holding
course

Figure 3–5. Holding-pattern description.

OM

L

L

MM

Runway
Typical procedure on an ILS outer marker

VOR
VOR

Typical procedure at intersection of VOR radials
Holding course
away from navaid

Holding course
toward the navaid
VORTAC

15 n mi DME fix
10 n mi DME fix
Typical procedure at DME fix

Figure 3–6. Examples of holding.

150 / CHAPTER 3
• The radial, course, bearing, azimuth, airway, or route on which the aircraft
is to hold.
• The direction of the turns in the holding pattern if a nonstandard holding
pattern will be used. A standard holding pattern requires right-hand turns; a
nonstandard pattern uses left turns.
• The holding-pattern length if a nonstandard holding pattern is being used.
A standard holding pattern has a 1-minute inbound leg length (1 ½ minutes
inbound leg length if the aircraft is holding above 14,000 feet).
• The Expect further clearance (EFC) time. If pilots lose radio contact with ATC,
they are expected to remain in the holding pattern until the EFC time, after
which they will depart the holding pattern and continue along the route of
flight issued in the last clearance. (“Hold northwest of Boiler on the three two
three radial. Expect further clearance at one five three five,” “Hold southwest of
Vages on victor two fifty-one. Expect further clearance at two three four one.”)
• The pilot is expected to enter the holding pattern using the procedures described
in the Aeronautical Information Manual. The pilot will maneuver the aircraft
so as to track inbound on the assigned course and will attempt to make the
inbound leg 1 minute in length. This is the only way in which a pilot can
hold and accurately time the inbound leg length. Air traffic controllers should
never issue holding instructions that require a pilot to hold outbound from
the holding fix. Since the inbound leg would not be located along any defined
course, it would be impossible for the pilot to hold properly.
• Any additional clearance information. This information might include position
reports or arrival procedures. Required reports include crossing certain
navigational fixes or changes in altitude. Arrival procedures may also be
included in this portion of a clearance. An arrival clearance could be either a
standard instrument approach procedure or a standard terminal arrival route
(STAR) clearance (see Figures 3–7 and 3–8).
STARs are similar to departure procedures and describe a common arrival
procedure. (“Via the Indy one arrival.”)
7. The departure control frequency and transponder code assignment. (The
operation and use of a transponder are covered in Chapter 8.) (“Departure control
frequency one two three point eight five. Squawk zero three four five.”)

An entire IFR clearance to an aircraft operating in controlled airspace will usually include most of the preceding components. The proper phraseology that
should be used when issuing an IFR clearance is included in Chapter 4. A few
examples of IFR clearances are as follows:
“United six eleven cleared to the Chicago O’Hare Airport via direct Boiler,
victor seven, Chicago Heights, direct. Maintain seven thousand. Departure
frequency one two three point eight five. Squawk five five four five.”
“Cherokee two three two papa alpha cleared to the Indianapolis Airport via the
Chicago eight departure over Boiler, victor ninety-seven and the Indy seven arrival.
Maintain three thousand, expect eight thousand five minutes after departure.
Departure frequency one two eight point zero five, squawk five five four three.”

Air Traffic Control System Structure

Figure 3–7. Standard terminal arrival route chart for Orlando, Florida.

/

151

152 / CHAPTER 3
U.S. TERMINAL PROCEDURES PUBLICATION: Aeronautical Information
STANDARD TERMINAL ARRIVAL (STAR) CHARTS
DEPARTURE PROCEDURE (DP) CHARTS
RADIO AIDS
TO NAVIGATION

VOR

TACAN

VOR/DME

NDB/DME

VORTAC

LOC/DME

58

STANDARD TERMINAL ARRIVAL (STAR) CHARTS
DEPARTURE PROCEDURE (DP) CHARTS
ROUTES

LOC
NDB (Non-directional Beacon)
LMM, LOM (Compass locator)
Marker Beacon
Localizer Course
SDF Course

SPECIAL USE
AIRSPACE

ALTITUDES

Localizer Offset

5500

2300

Mandatory
Altitude

Minimum
Altitude

Maximum
Altitude

(Cross at)

(Cross at
or above)

(Cross at
or below)

4800

2200
Recommended
Altitude

AIRPORTS
STAR Charts

REPORTING
POINTS/FIXES
WAYPOINTS

DP Charts

NOTES

(NAME) (" " omitted when it conflicts with runway pattern)

WAYPOINT (Compulsory)
WAYPOINT (Non-Compulsory)
FLYOVER POINT
MAP WP (Flyover)

W

Figure 3–8. Standard terminal arrival route chart legend.

WAAS VNAV outages may occur daily due to
initial system limitations. WAAS VNAV NOTAM
service is not provided for this approach.

Air Traffic Control System Structure

/

153

Clearance Amendments As the IFR flight progresses toward the destination
airport, the clearance may need to be amended by ATC. The entire clearance
need not be repeated, only those items that have been changed by the controller.
For example:
“Five four papa uniform, climb and maintain seven thousand.”
“United six eleven cleared to the Indianapolis airport via victor ninety-seven
west.”
“American two thirty-one, descend and maintain four thousand, cross two zero
DME southeast of Boiler at or below niner thousand.”

IFR Flight in
Uncontrolled
Airspace

IFR flight in uncontrolled airspace is permitted so long as the pilot and aircraft
are properly certified. The FAA does not provide any air traffic control services
however. It is up to the pilot to maintain separation from other aircraft and
from obstacles on the ground. In general, aircraft seldom make long IFR journeys in uncontrolled airspace, but sometimes they need to transit uncontrolled
airspace while landing or departing from small, uncontrolled airports. Controllers must be aware that the pilots might be maneuvering or flying a specific
course that provides terrain and/or aircraft separation while within uncontrolled airspace and that the controller should never issue instructions that
would negate the pilot’s need to conform to VFR flight regulations while within
uncontrolled airspace. ATC clearances to operate are never issued to aircraft
(either VFR or IFR) flying in uncontrolled airspace.

VFR Flight in
Controlled
Airspace

In controlled airspace, the FAA offers both separation and additional ATC
services to pilots. However, depending on the type of flight and the category of
airspace involved, the pilot may not be required to use these services or even to
contact air traffic control facilities. Within controlled airspace, IFR flights are
required to receive these services, but VFR flights may not be. In general, as
long as VFR pilots can meet the weather minima outlined by Federal Aviation
Regulation (FAR) 91 and are not entering any special use airspace, no contact
with ATC is required. VFR pilots may fly in controlled airspace as long as they
comply with the following regulations included in FAR 91:
1. VFR pilots must generally provide their own separation from other VFR and
IFR aircraft and the terrain.
2. VFR pilots are not required to file a flight plan or contact ATC unless they are
planning to enter an area of restricted class airspace where contact is mandatory.
VFR flight plans are voluntary and are used by the FAA only to assist in locating lost
or overdue aircraft.
3. The weather conditions during flight must meet the criteria specified in FAR
91.155. VFR pilots must also maintain the minimum cloud distance stipulated
in the FARs. The minimum visibility and distance from the clouds vary with the
aircraft’s cruising altitude and the class of airspace within which the flight is
operating. See Table 3–2.

154 / CHAPTER 3
Table 3–2.

VFR Weather Minima for Operations in Controlled Airspace
Airspace

Flight Visibility

Distance from Clouds

Class A airspace

Not Applicable

Not Applicable

Class B airspace

3 statute miles

Clear of Clouds

Class C airspace

3 statute miles

500 feet below 1,000 feet above
2,000 feet horizontal

Class D airspace

3 statute miles

500 feet below 1,000 feet above
2,000 feet horizontal

3 statute miles

500 feet below 1,000 feet above
2,000 feet horizontal

Class E airspace
Less than 10,000
feet MSL

At or above 10,000 5 statute miles
feet MSL

1,000 feet below 1,000 feet above
1 statute mile horizontal

These minima are designed to maximize the chances of a VFR pilot seeing and
avoiding other VFR and IFR aircraft. If the pilot is unable to comply with these
minima, VFR flight cannot legally be conducted. The pilot must then either land or
receive an IFR or a special VFR clearance to continue the flight. There are additional
regulations governing special VFR flights with which pilots must conform. In general, a
special VFR clearance permits a VFR pilot to fly in certain weather conditions that do
not meet minimum VFR criteria. VFR aircraft operating under special VFR clearances
are afforded IFR separation from both VFR and IFR aircraft by ATC, however.
4. VFR pilots operating in controlled airspace are required to fly at the proper
altitude for the direction of flight unless otherwise requested by ATC. FAR 91.159
describe the approved cruising altitude or flight levels to be used by VFR aircraft in
controlled airspace. An aircraft operating under VFR in level cruising flight more than
3,000 feet above the surface is required to maintain the appropriate altitude or flight
level prescribed here, unless otherwise authorized by ATC:
• When operating below 18,000 feet MSL and on a magnetic course of zero
degrees through 179 degrees, any odd thousand foot MSL altitude ⫹500 feet
(such as 3,500, 5,500, or 7,500) or
• When operating below 18,000 feet MSL and on a magnetic course of 180
degrees through 359 degrees, any even thousand foot MSL altitude ⫹500 feet
(such as 4,500, 6,500, or 8,500)

These altitudes were chosen to minimize the potential for midair collisions between two aircraft flying in opposite directions. Whenever assigning
altitudes to VFR aircraft, controllers should attempt to comply with this regulation. However, if traffic conditions dictate, controllers are permitted to assign
a nonstandard cruising altitude to VFR aircraft receiving ATC services. When
these ATC services are terminated, however, the VFR pilot should be advised to
return the aircraft to the proper altitude as soon as it is feasible.

Air Traffic Control System Structure
Table 3–3.

/

155

VFR Weather Minima for Operations in Uncontrolled Airspace
Airspace

Flight Visibility

Distance from Clouds

Daylight flight at 1,200 feet or less AGL

1 statute mile

Clear of clouds

Nighttime flight at 1,200 feet or less
AGL

3 statute miles

500 feet below

Class G:

1,000 feet above
2,000 feet horizontal
Daylight flight at more than 1,200 feet
AGL but less than 10,000 feet MSL

1 statute mile

500 feet below
1,000 feet above
2,000 feet horizontal

Nighttime flight at more than 1,200 feet
AGL but less than 10,000 feet MSL

3 statute miles

500 feet below
1,000 feet above
2,000 feet horizontal

Any VFR flight at more than 1,200 feet
AGL at or above 10,000 feet MSL

5 statute miles

1,000 feet below
1,000 feet above
1 statute mile
horizontal

VFR Flight in
Uncontrolled
Airspace

In uncontrolled airspace, the FAA does not provide separation services to pilots,
and clearances are never issued. In general, as long as VFR pilots can meet the
weather minima outlined by FAR 91 (see Table 3–3), and are not entering any
special use airspace, no contact with ATC is required to fly in uncontrolled
airspace. In uncontrolled airspace:
1. VFR pilots must generally provide their own separation from other VFR and
IFR aircraft and the terrain.
2. VFR pilots are not required to file a flight plan or contact ATC.
3. The weather conditions during flight must meet the criteria specified in FAR
91.155.

Airspace Classes
In addition to the general operating rules and procedures previously stated,
additional flight requirements and ATC services are provided depending on the
airspace classification. All the airspace above the U.S. has been designated by
the FARs into one of six classes (see Table 3–4).

Airspace
Features

Class A

Class B

Class C

Class D

Class E

Class G

Dimensions

Altitudes at and
above 18,000'
MSL

Surrounding
high-density
airports up to
an altitude of
about 10,000'
AGL

Surrounding
medium-density
airports up to
an altitude of
about AGL

Surrounding
nonradar control
towered airports
up to an altitude of
about AGL

Airspace floor varies
between the surface
of the Earth, 700⬘ or
1,200' AGL. Airspace
extends up to but
not including 18,000
MSL

Airspace not
included in Class
A, B, C, D or E
designations

Level of
Control

Positive
controlled

Positive
controlled

Controlled

Controlled

Controlled

Uncontrolled

Flight
Operations
Permitted

IFR only

IFR and VFR
if weather
conditions
permit

IFR and VFR
if weather
conditions
permit

IFR and VFR if
weather conditions
permit

IFR and VFR if
weather conditions
permit

IFR and VFR if
weather conditions
permit

Aircraft
Entry
Requirements

ATC clearance
required for both
IFR and VFR

ATC clearance
required for
both IFR and
VFR

ATC clearance
required for
IFR. VFR
aircraft must
make radio
contact prior to
entry.

ATC clearance
required for IFR.
VFR aircraft must
make radio contact
prior to entry.

ATC clearance
required for IFR.
VFR aircraft are not
required to contact
ATC.

ATC does not offer
separation services
to either IFR or
VFR aircraft.

Services
Provided by
ATC to IFR
Aircraft

Standard
separation (5 nm
or 1000') applied
to all aircraft

Standard
separation
between IFR
aircraft. (3 nm
or 1000'
vertical)

Standard
separation
between IFR
aircraft. (3 nm
or 1000'
vertical)

Standard
separation between
IFR aircraft. (3 nm
or 1000' vertical
radar separation or
standard nonradar
separation).

Standard separation
between IFR
aircraft. (3 nm
or 1000' vertical
radar separation or
standard nonradar
separation).

No services
required nor will
clearances be
issued. If traffic
conditions permit,
IFR aircraft might
be provided traffic
advisories and
flight following.

156 / CHAPTER 3

Table 3–4. Airspace Classification

Services
Provided by
ATC to VFR
Aircraft

VFR aircraft not
permitted

Aircraft will be
separated from
large or jet
IFR aircraft by
either 1 ½ nm
or 500'
separation.

Aircraft will
be separated
from IFR or
VFR aircraft
by either target
resolution,
visual, or
500' vertical
separation.

Provide traffic
information
concerning IFR
and known VFR
aircraft

None required. If
traffic conditions
permit, VFR aircraft
might be provided
traffic advisories and
flight following.

No services
required nor will
clearances be
issued. If traffic
conditions permit,
VFR aircraft might
be provided traffic
advisories and
flight following.

3 statute miles

3 statute miles

3 statute miles

1 statute mile

500' below, 1,000'
above, and 2,000'
horizontal.

500' below, 1,000'
above, and 2,000'
horizontal.

Clear of clouds

Aircraft will be
separated from
small IFR or
VFR aircraft
by either target
resolution,
visual or
500' vertical
separation.
VFR not allowed

3 statute miles

Minimum
Distance from
Clouds for
VFR Aircraft

VFR not allowed

Clear of clouds 500' below,
1,000' above,
and 2,000'
horizontal.

Entry Requirements

IFR Restrictions

VFR Restrictions

Charting

Prohibited
Area

Flight of aircraft is prohibited
based on security or other reasons
associated with the national welfare.

Flight not permitted

IFR flight not
permitted

VFR flight not
permitted

Charted and
identified on
both IFR and
VFR charts.
Identification
numbers
prefixed with
the letter “P”.
(continued)

157

Airspace Description and Use

/

Airspace

Air Traffic Control System Structure

Minimum
Visibility for
VFR Aircraft

Airspace Description and Use

Entry Requirements

IFR Restrictions

VFR Restrictions

Charting

Restricted
Area

Flight of aircraft, while not wholly
prohibited, is subject to restrictions.
Restricted areas denote the existence
of unusual hazards to aircraft such
as artillery firing, aerial gunnery, or
guided missile practice.

Aircraft entry might be
permitted if restricted
area not in use (cold).
Aircraft entry not
permitted when area is
“hot.”

If the restricted
area is not
active and has
been released,
ATC will allow
the aircraft
to operate in
the restricted
airspace without
issuing specific
clearance for it to
do so.

The pilot must
contact the
controlling agency
to determine the
areas, status. If the
restricted area is not
active, VFR aircraft
may operate in the
restricted airspace
without specific
clearance to do so.

Charted and
identified on
both IFR and
VFR charts.
Identification
numbers
prefixed with
the letter “R”.

If the restricted
area is active,
ATC will issue
clearances which
ensures IFR
aircraft avoidance.

If the restricted
area is active, it
is the VFR pilots,
responsibility to
avoid the area.

IFR aircraft are
not normally
routed into or
through a TFR
unless its mission
is specifically
related to the
TFR.

A notice to airmen
will be issued
restricting VFR
flight. It is the pilots,
responsibility to
remain clear of the
TFR airspace.

Temporary
Flight
Restrictions

TFRs are issued to protect persons
and property within the vicinity of an
emergency on the ground. Examples
include: gas leaks or spills; volcanic
eruptions; hijacking incidents, aircraft
accident sites; wildfire suppression;
disaster areas; aerial demonstrations
or major sporting events; or reasons
of national security.

The amount of airspace
needed to protect
persons and property or
provide a safe environment for rescue/relief
aircraft operations
is normally limited
to within 2,000 feet
above the surface and
within 3-nautical miles
Incidents occurring
within Class B, Class C,
or Class D airspace will
normally be handled
through existing
procedures and should
not require the issuance
of temporary flight
restrictions.

Normally not
placed on
IFR or VFR
navigation
charts. Might
be charted
as a graphic
NOTAM.

158 / CHAPTER 3

Airspace

Military
Operations
Area

Pilots operating
under VFR are
permitted to enter
an MOA without
clearance but should
exercise extreme
caution.

If the MOA is
active, ATC will
issue clearances
which insures
IFR aircraft
avoidance.

Pilots can contact
any FSS within 100
miles of the area to
obtain accurate realtime information
concerning the MOA
hours of operation.
Depending on
ATC capabilities
and workload,
VFR pilots may be
able to contact the
controlling agency
for traffic advisories.

Routine IFR
flight plan/
clearance and IFR
communications
meet ADIZ
requirements

VFR pilots must file
D/VFR flight plan
and initiate contact
with ATC prior to
entering ADIZ

Charted and
identified on
both IFR and
VFR charts.
Identification
name and
abbreviated
“MOA” placed
on chart.

Charted and
identified on
both IFR and
VFR charts.
(continued)

159

Flight plan must be
filed. Aircraft must
make contact with
ATC prior to ADIZ
entry.

If the MOA is
not active and
has been released,
ATC will allow
the aircraft to
operate in the
airspace without
issuing specific
clearance for it to
do so.

/

An area of airspace over land or
water, extending upward from the
surface, within which the ready
identification, location, and control
of aircraft are required in the interest
of national security.

No restrictions on VFR
aircraft. IFR aircraft
might be permitted
entry if MOA is
cold but will not be
permitted when area is
“hot”.

Air Traffic Control System Structure

ADIZ

MOAs consist of airspace of defined
vertical and lateral limits established
for the purpose of separating certain
military training activities from
IFR traffic. Examples of activities
conducted in MOAs include, but are
not limited to, air combat tactics,
air intercepts, aerobatics, formation
training, and low-altitude tactics.
Military pilots flying in an active
MOA are exempted from the FAR
which prohibits aerobatic flight
within Class D and Class E airspace
and within Federal airways. DoD
aircraft operating within an MOA
are authorized to operate aircraft at
airspeeds in excess of 250 knots.

Airspace Description and Use

Entry Requirements

IFR Restrictions

VFR Restrictions

Charting

Terminal
Radar
Service
Area
(TRSA)

TRSAs were originally established as
part of the Terminal Radar Program
at selected airports. TRSAs precede
the establishment of class C airspace.
It was envisioned originally that
all TRSAs would be converted to
Class C airspace, but some were not.
TRSAs do not fit into any of the U.S.
airspace classes but continue to be
operated where participating pilots
can receive additional radar.

Airspace surrounding
designated airports
wherein ATC provides
radar vectoring,
sequencing, and
separation on a fulltime basis for all IFR
and participating VFR
aircraft. No clearance
required.

TRSAs primarily
affect VFR
flights; therefore,
IFR aircraft on
an IFR clearance
are not affected.

Pilots operating
under VFR are
encouraged to
contact the radar
approach control
and avail themselves
of the TRSA Services
which include traffic
advisories and
arrival sequencing.
However,
participation is
voluntary on the
part of the pilot.

Charted and
identified on
VFR charts.

Domestic
ADIZ

An ADIZ over U.S. metropolitan
areas, which is activated and
deactivated as needed, with
dimensions, activation dates,
and other relevant information
disseminated via NOTAM.

After 9/11, a more or
less permanent ADIZ
was established over
the Washington D.C.
metropolitan area.
At various times,
temporary domestic
ADIZs have also been
delineated.

Routine IFR
flight plan/
clearance
and IFR
communications
meet ADIZ entry
requirements.
There are

VFR operations
within, into, or
out of an ADIZ
is permitted if the
pilots file a flight
plan, establish and
maintain radio
communications,
and continuously

Charted and
identified on
both IFR and
VFR charts.

additional
security
equipments
established for
flights into and
out of a domestic
ADIZ.

transmit a discrete
transponder code
assigned by ATC.
There may also
be additional
security equipments
established for
flights into and out
of a domestic ADIZ.

160 / CHAPTER 3

Airspace

Alert areas are depicted to inform
pilots of areas that may contain a
high volume of pilot training or an
unusual type of aerial activity.

A clearance is not
required to enter an
alert area. All flight
activity within an alert
area is conducted in
accordance with FARS.

IFR flights will
be routinely
routed through
alert areas. IFR
aircraft as well
as participating
aircraft shall be
equally responsible for collision
avoidance.

VFR flight
permitted. All
aircraft shall be
equally responsible
for collision
avoidance.

Charted and
identified on
both IFR and
VFR charts.
Identification
numbers
prefixed with
the letter “A”.

Airport
Advisory
Service

Airport advisory service is operated
within 10 statute miles of an
airport where a control tower is
not operating, but where an FSS is
located on the airport. AAS is not
regulatory airspace.

The FSS provides a
complete local airport
advisory service, which
includes known airport
and traffic information
to arriving and
departing aircraft.

Routine IFR
flight plan/
clearance
and IFR
communications
permits

VFR pilots may
select to contact
the FSS on the
appropriate
frequency to receive
airport advisory
service.

Listed on
aeronautical
charts and
flight planning
publications

Military
Training
Routes

MTRs were developed for use by
the military for the purpose of
conducting low-altitude, high-speed
training. The routes above 1,500 feet
AGL are developed to be flown, to
the maximum extent possible, under
IFR. The routes at 1,500 feet AGL
and below are generally developed to
be flown under VFR.

Military aircraft
operating VFR will
operate using VFR
rules. IR training
routes require an ATC
clearance from ATC.

VFR no

IFR yes

Both VR and IR
routes are charted
and identified
on VFR charts.
Identification
numbers prefixed
with either the
letters “IR” or
“VR”.

There are both IFR and VFR MTRs:

VR routes are
not depicted
on IFR charts
although IR
charts are.

/

161

Operations on
these routes are
conducted in
accordance with
VFR except flight
visibility shall be
5 miles or more,
and flights shall
not be conducted
below a ceiling of
less than 3,000
feet AGL.

Air Traffic Control System Structure

Alert Area

(continued)

Airspace Description and Use

Entry Requirements

Controlled
Firing Area

CFAs contain activities that, if
not conducted in a controlled
environment, could be hazardous
to nonparticipating aircraft. CFA
activities are suspended immediately
when spotter aircraft, radar, or
ground lookout positions indicate an
that aircraft might be approaching
the area.

National
Security
Areas

National security areas are
established at locations where
there is a requirement for increased
security and safety of ground
facilities.

Pilots are requested
to voluntarily avoid
flying through the
depicted NSA. When
it is necessary to
provide a greater level
of security and safety,
flight in NSAs may be
temporarily prohibited
by regulation.

Warning
Area

A warning area is similar to a
restricted area, but it is offshore
of the United States located in
international airspace, and flight
cannot be legally restricted.

Alert: The purpose
of such warning
areas is to warn
nonparticipating pilots
of the potential danger.

IFR Restrictions

VFR Restrictions

Charting

There is no
need to chart
CFAs since they
do not cause a
nonparticipating
aircraft to
change its flight
path.

If the alert area
is not active and
has been released,
ATC will allow
the aircraft to
operate in the
airspace without
issuing specific
clearance for it to
do so.
If the area is
active, ATC will
issue clearances
which ensures
IFR aircraft
avoidance.

The pilot must
contact the
controlling agency
to determine the
areas status. VFR
aircraft can legally
fly through warning
areas.

Charted and
identified on
both IFR and
VFR charts.
Identification
numbers
prefixed with
the letter “W”.

162 / CHAPTER 3

Airspace

Air Traffic Control System Structure

/

163

In each class of airspace, both VFR and IFR pilots must comply with the
regulations that have been previously mentioned as well as supplemental rules
that may apply to flight operations in their specific airspace. In general, Class
A is most restrictive, whereas Class G is least.
Class A
Airspace

Class A airspace is generally defined as the airspace extending from 18,000
feet MSL up to and including FL 600, including the airspace overlying the
waters within 12 nautical miles off the coast of the forty-eight contiguous
states and Alaska as well as the designated international airspace beyond 12
nautical miles off the coast of the forty-eight contiguous states and Alaska
within areas of domestic radio navigational signal or ATC radar coverage
and within which domestic procedures are applied. Class A airspace is not
specifically charted.
Class A airspace evolved from the jet advisory areas that were created
in the 1960s to provide advisory services to civilian and military turbojet
aircraft operating at high altitudes. When the jet advisory areas were first created, they extended from FL 240 to FL 410 and projected 14 nautical miles
laterally on either side of every jet route. It was believed that pilots would
be unable to “see and avoid” any other VFR or IFR aircraft operating at the
same altitude at the high airspeeds at which these aircraft routinely operated.
Within jet advisory areas, air traffic controllers were required to use radar to
constantly monitor every IFR aircraft operating on a jet route and issue any
heading changes (known as vectors) necessary to ensure that the IFR aircraft
remained separated from any other aircraft observed on the controller’s radar
display.
The controllers were not usually in radio contact with the VFR aircraft,
so it was impossible to determine their altitude, route of flight, or intentions.
Because the actions of these aircraft could not be predicted, the controllers were
forced to issue numerous unnecessary vectors to IFR aircraft to ensure that they
would remain safely separated. Although this procedure might seem to decrease
the probability of midair collisions, in many cases it actually made the situation
more dangerous. Since the intentions of the VFR pilots were unknown, it was
possible that heading changes could be issued to the IFR pilot at precisely the
same moment that the VFR pilot began to maneuver to avoid the collision. This
might create a situation even more dangerous than if no heading change had
been issued at all.
It was soon obvious that unless the controller could be in direct radio
contact with every aircraft operating in the vicinity of the jet routes, it would
be impossible to positively separate IFR from VFR aircraft. In an attempt to
rectify this problem, the FAA has since classified all airspace between 18,000’
and 60,000” MSL as Class A airspace (see Figure 3–9).
FAR 91.135 requires that every aircraft operating within Class A airspace
operate under instrument flight rules and receive a clearance from ATC. This
ATC separation of all aircraft is known as positive control. To operate within
Class A airspace, pilots must comply with the following regulations.

164 / CHAPTER 3

Figure 3–9. Class A airspace.

Air Traffic Control System Structure
FL 600
18,000 MSL

/

165

CLASS A

14,500 AGL

CLASS E

CLASS B
CLASS C
Nontowered
Airport

CLASS D
1,200 AGL

700 AGL

CLASS G

CLASS G

CLASS G

Figure 3–10. U.S. airspace classifications.

• The pilot must be rated for instrument flight.
• The aircraft must be operated under instrument flight rules at a route and at an
altitude assigned by ATC.
• All aircraft must be transponder equipped as specified in FAR 91.215.

The creation of this airspace ensured that every aircraft operating at or
above 18,000 feet MSL was provided separation services by air traffic controllers. Since the creation of Class A airspace, high-altitude midair collisions have
become extremely rare in this country. Figure 3–10 summarizes all the airspace
classifications over the United States.
Class B
Airspace

Even though the establishment of Class A airspace virtually eliminated highaltitude midair collisions, as traffic increased around airports, low-altitude collisions began to occur with increasing frequency. The FAA responded by
creating a low-altitude version of Class A airspace called a terminal control
area (TCA), which has since been reclassified as Class B airspace. Class B airspace is defined as the airspace that extends from the surface of the Earth up to
10,000 feet MSL surrounding the nation’s busiest airports in terms of IFR
operations or passenger enplanements.
The configuration of each Class B airspace area is individually tailored and
consists of a surface area and two or more layers (some Class B airspace areas
resemble upside-down wedding cakes) and is designed to contain all published
instrument procedures once an aircraft enters the airspace (see Figure 3–11).
An ATC clearance is required for all aircraft to operate in the area, and all
aircraft that are cleared receive separation services within the airspace.
Each successive layer of Class B airspace extends out from the central
airport, with the floor of each layer raised to a slightly higher altitude. This

166 / CHAPTER 3

Figure 3–11. Graphic view of Class B airspace and the same airspace as depicted on a sectional chart.

Air Traffic Control System Structure

/

167

design provides the controller with sufficient airspace to vector aircraft to an
instrument approach at the primary airport.
The separation procedures applied to aircraft operating within Class B
airspace are similar to those applied to aircraft operating in Class A airspace.
Prior to entering this airspace, both IFR and VFR pilots are required by FAR
91.131 to receive a clearance from the controlling ATC facility. While operating
within the confines of Class B airspace, every pilot is required, if at all possible,
to comply with the instructions issued by the controller. Air traffic controllers
are responsible for the positive separation of every aircraft within Class B airspace, whether operating under instrument or visual flight rules. This generally
means that aircraft operating at the same altitude must be kept at least 3 nautical miles apart. This separation need not be applied if there is at least 1,000 feet
of altitude between the aircraft. If either of the aircraft is VFR, the separation
can usually be reduced to 1½ miles lateral or 500 feet vertical separation. If
both aircraft are VFR or if one is VFR and the other is a small IFR, either 500
feet of vertical separation must be used, or the controller must ensure that the
radar targets do not touch. This is known as target resolution.
While operating within or, in some cases, near Class B airspace, every
pilot must comply with the following FAR 91 regulations:
• Every aircraft must be equipped with appropriate communication and
navigation radio equipment. This includes a two-way radio transceiver, VOR
or TACAN navigation capability, and a transponder. (A transponder permits
the controller to positively identify any particular aircraft when using radar for
ATC separation. Transponders are discussed in detail in Chapter 8.)
• Aircraft may not operate within the airspace underlying Class B airspace at an
indicated airspeed greater than 200 knots.
• Unless specifically authorized by the controller, every turbine-powered aircraft
operating to or from the primary airport must operate above the floor while
within the lateral confines of the Class B airspace.
• Every aircraft entering Class B airspace or operating within 30 nautical miles of
the primary airport must be equipped with a mode C altitude encoder. This device
permits the aircraft’s altitude to be shown directly on the controller’s radar display.

Pilots operating on IFR flight plans do not need to specifically request permission to enter Class B airspace. VFR pilots, however, must request permission
from the ATC facility prior to entering the airspace. Until permission is received
from the controller, the VFR pilot is required to remain clear of Class B airspace.
IFR aircraft operating within Class B airspace have priority over VFR
aircraft. Air traffic controllers are permitted to deny VFR aircraft clearances if
conditions are such that, in the opinion of the controller, the entry of the VFR
aircraft might compromise safety. These conditions include, but are not limited
to, weather, traffic conditions, controller workload, and equipment limitations.
However, if the controller concludes that VFR operations can be safely approved,
the pilot may be issued a VFR clearance to enter. Upon receiving the clearance,

168 / CHAPTER 3
and after entering, the VFR pilot is required to comply with any instruction
issued by the controller but must also observe the basic VFR flight rules.
At no time may the VFR pilot disregard VFR flight rules while attempting
to comply with a controller’s request. If the pilot believes that the controller’s
instructions might cause a violation of any VFR flight rule, the pilot is authorized by FARs 91.3 and 91.123 to disregard that instruction but must inform
the controller as soon as feasible.
The following terminal areas around the country are currently designated
by FAR 71 as Class B airspace:
Atlanta, GA
Baltimore, MD-Washington, D.C. area
Washington Dulles International Airport
Washington National Ronald Reagan Airport
Baltimore/Washington International Airport
Boston, MA
Charlotte, NC
Chicago O’Hare, IL
Cincinnati, OH-(Covington, KY)
Cleveland, OH
Dallas, TX
Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport
Dallas Love Field Airport
Denver, CO
Detroit, MI
George Bush Intercontinental/Houston Airport
Honolulu, HI
Houston, TX
John F Kennedy International Airport
Kansas City, MO
LaGuardia Airport
Las Vegas, NV
Los Angeles, CA
Memphis, TN
Miami, FL
Minneapolis, MN
New Orleans, LA
New York, NY-Newark, NJ area
Newark Liberty International Airport
Orlando, FL
Philadelphia, PA

Air Traffic Control System Structure

/

169

Phoenix, AZ
Pittsburgh, PA
Saint Louis, MO
Salt Lake City, UT
San Diego, CA
San Francisco, CA
Seattle, WA
Tampa, FL
Washington Dulles International Airport
Washington National Ronald Reagen Airport
William P. Hobby Airport

Class C
Airspace

Class C airspace was initially implemented in 1984 as airport radar service
areas (ARSAs) to provide separation to aircraft flying within the vicinity of
medium-sized airports that did not qualify for a TCA. After the airspace reclassification project, ARSAs became Class C airspace.
Class C airspace in the United States surrounds medium-activity airports
that have the capability to provide ATC services using radar. In general, the
Class C airspace is a standard-shaped area that extends from the Earth’s surface, or from an intermediate altitude, up to a higher altitude approximately
4,000 feet above ground level. Within Class C airspace, every aircraft, both IFR
and VFR, is subject to the operating rules and pilot and equipment requirements specified in FAR 91. These requirements are similar to, but less restrictive
than, the requirements to enter Class A airspace. Student pilot entry into Class
A airspace is restricted, whereas student pilots are permitted to operate within
Class C airspace under the same rules of operation as any VFR pilot.
Class C airspace is defined as the airspace that extends from the surface
to 4,000 feet above the airport elevation (charted using MSL) surrounding
those airports that have an operational control tower, are serviced by a radar
approach control, and have a certain number of IFR operations or passenger
enplanements (see Figures 3–12 and 3–13). Although the configuration of each
Class C airspace area is individually tailored, the airspace usually consists of
a 5-nautical-mile radius core surface area that extends from the surface up to
4,000 feet above the airport elevation and a 10-nautical-mile radius shelf area
that extends from 1,200 feet to 4,000 feet above the airport. An outer area
extends 20 nautical miles outward from the center of the primary airport and
extends from the lower limits of radar/radio coverage up to the ceiling of the
approach control’s delegated airspace.
Once the aircraft enters Class C airspace, the pilot is required to comply
with any instruction issued by the controller but must still comply with the
visibility and cloud avoidance requirements of FAR 91. At no time may a VFR
pilot disregard the basic VFR rules when trying to comply with the controller’s
clearance or subsequent instructions. If the pilot perceives that a controller’s
request might force a violation of any of the visual flight rules, the pilot is

170 / CHAPTER 3

Core surface area
5 n mi
Shelf area
10 n mi

Height
above
airport
4,000 ft.

Outer area
20 n mi

Airport

1,200 ft. AGL

Services upon establishing two-way radio
communication and radar contact;
Sequencing arrivals
IFR/IFR standard separation
IFR/VFR traffic advisories and conflict resolution
VFR/VFR traffic advisories

Figure 3–12. Depiction of Class C airspace.

Figure 3–13. Class C airspace as depicted on a sectional chart.

Air Traffic Control System Structure

/

171

authorized by FAR 91 to disregard that instruction but must inform the controller as soon as possible. Any VFR or IFR pilot who wishes to enter Class C
airspace must comply with the following requirements:
• The pilot must establish communications with the appropriate air traffic control
facility prior to entering. Unless the pilot is instructed to remain clear, the
establishment of communication with the controller authorizes pilot entry into
Class C airspace.
• While within Class C airspace, the pilot is required to comply with any of the
instructions issued by the controller, unless these instructions will cause the pilot
to violate a federal regulation, in which case the pilot is authorized to disregard
the offending instruction.
• The aircraft must be equipped with an operable mode C transponder.

The following airports have been established as Class C airspace primary
airports:
Alabama – Birmingham, Huntsville, Mobile
Alaska – Anchorage
Arizona – Tucson
Arkansas – Little Rock, Fayetteville
California – Beale Air Force Base, Burbank, Fresno, Monterey, Oakland
International, Ontario, March Air Reserve Base, Sacramento, Santa Barbara,
John Wayne Orange County, San José
Colorado – Colorado Springs
Connecticut – Hartford-Bradley International
Florida – Daytona Beach, Fort Lauderdale-Hollywood, Jacksonville, Naval Air
Station Whiting Field (South), Naval Air Station Pensacola, Naval Air Station
Whiting Field (North), Palm Beach, Pensacola Regional, Southwest FloridaFort Myers, Orlando-Sanford, Sarasota-Bradenton, Tallahassee
Georgia – Columbus, Savannah
Hawaii – Kahului-Maui
Idaho – Boise
Illinois – University of Illinois-Champaign-Urbana, Chicago Midway, Quad
City-Moline, Greater Peoria, Capital-Springfield
Indiana – Evansville, Fort Wayne, Indianapolis, South Bend
Iowa – Cedar Rapids, Des Moines
Kansas – Wichita
Kentucky – Lexington, Louisville-Standiford
Louisiana – Barksdale Air Force Base, Baton Rouge, Lafayette, Shreveport
Maine – Bangor, Portland
Michigan – Flint, Grand Rapids, Lansing
Mississippi – Columbus, Air Force Base, Jackson

172 / CHAPTER 3
Missouri – Springfield
Montana – Billings
Nebraska – Lincoln, Offutt Air Force Base, Omaha
Nevada – Reno
New Hampshire – Manchester
New Jersey – Atlantic City
New Mexico – Albuquerque
New York – Albany, Buffalo, Long Island MacArthur,
Rochester, Syracuse
North Carolina – Asheville, Fayetteville, Greensboro-Piedmont Triad,
Pope Air Force Base, Raleigh-Durham
Ohio – Akron-Canton, Columbus, Dayton, Toledo
Oklahoma – Oklahoma City, Tinker Air Force Base, Tulsa
Oregon – Portland
Pennsylvania – Allentown-Bethlehem-Eastern
Rhode Island – Providence
South Carolina – Columbia, Charleston, Greenville-Spartanburg,
Myrtle Beach, Shaw Air Force Base
Tennessee – Nashville, Chattanooga, Knoxville
Texas – Abilene, Amarillo, Austin, Biggs Army Airfield, Corpus
Christi, Laughlin Air Force Base, Dyess Air Force Base, El Paso, Harlingen,
Lubbock, Midland, San Antonio
Vermont – Burlington
Virginia – Norfolk, Roanoke, Richmond
Washington – Spokane, Naval Air Station Whidbey Island, Fairchild Air
Force Base
West Virginia – Charleston
Wisconsin – Green Bay, Milwaukee, Madison
Puerto Rico – San Juan
Virgin Islands – St. Thomas

Class D
Airspace

Class D airspace is defined as the airspace extending from the surface to 2,500
feet above the airport elevation (charted using MSL) surrounding those airports that have an operational control tower (see Figure 3–14). The configuration of each Class D airspace area is individually tailored, and when instrument
procedures are published, the airspace will generally be designed to contain the
procedures.
Pilots are required to establish two-way radio communication with the
air traffic control tower providing ATC services prior to entry and thereafter maintain those communications while in the Class D airspace. At airports
where the control tower does not operate 24 hours a day, the operating hours

Air Traffic Control System Structure

/

173

Figure 3–14. Class D airspace
surrounding an airport with an
operating control tower.

of the tower are listed on the appropriate charts and publications. During the
hours the tower is not in operation, Class E surface area rules or a combination
of Class E rules to 700 feet above ground level and Class G rules to the surface
are applicable as appropriate. Class D airspace areas are depicted on sectional
and terminal charts with blue segmented lines and on IFR en route low-altitude
charts with a boxed D.
Arrival extensions for instrument approach procedures may be Class D
or Class E airspace. As a general rule, if the extensions are all 2 miles or less
in length, they remain part of the Class D surface area. However, if any one
extension is greater than 2 miles, then all extensions become Class E. Due to the
speed differential among aircraft operating near the airport, unless authorized
or required by ATC, aircraft operating within Class D airspace at or below
2,500 feet above the surface are not permitted to operate at indicated airspeeds
of more than 200 knots (230 mph).
IFR aircraft are authorized to operate in Class D airspace if they are
routed through by ATC clearance. VFR pilots are permitted to fly through
Class D airspace as long as the basic VFR weather minima described in FAR 91
exist, the required cloud separation distances can be maintained, and permission has been granted from the control tower. An additional requirement for
VFR flight is that the cloud ceiling must be at least 1,000 feet above the ground
if the pilot wishes to operate below the ceiling. This requirement ensures that
VFR pilots will be able to maintain a distance of at least 500 feet below the
clouds and 500 feet above the surface of the Earth, which is a FAR 91 requirement for VFR flight.
VFR pilots may operate above the 1,000 foot ceiling as long as they are
able to climb above the ceiling while maintaining VFR conditions and can
maintain the basic FAR 91 weather minima while flying above the ceiling. If
the ceiling in the Class D airspace is less than 1,000 feet, or if the visibility is
less than 3 miles, a VFR pilot is not permitted to operate within the air space.
In these conditions, the pilot may request a special VFR (SVFR) clearance to
operate.

174 / CHAPTER 3
Special VFR

An SVFR clearance is a hybrid clearance in which VFR pilots navigate visually
but are separated by the controller from other IFR or SVFR aircraft. Special
VFR aircraft are required to remain clear of the clouds while operating within
Class D airspace but can operate with visibility as low as 1 mile. Special VFR
clearances may be issued only when requested by the pilot and when traffic
conditions permit their use. In general, SVFR flights are allocated a fairly large
block of airspace, since the pilot may need to navigate around clouds and
obstructions. Special VFR operations generally reduce the number of IFR aircraft that can land at an airport. Because of this impact on IFR flights, FAR 91
Appendix D mandates that SVFR clearances cannot be obtained at some of the
nation’s busiest airports.
Class D airspace located at airports with control towers is indicated on
VFR navigational charts using blue dashed lines. Class D airspace located at
airports without control towers is indicated on VFR navigational charts using
magenta dashes. Airspace where SVFR clearances cannot be issued is depicted
on VFR navigation charts with the words NO SVFR in the airport data block
(see Figure 3–15).

Class E
Airspace

Generally, if the airspace is not Class A, B, C, or D, and it is controlled airspace,
it is designated as Class E airspace. Class E airspace below 14,500 feet MSL is
charted on sectional, terminal, world, and IFR en route low-altitude charts.
Class E airspace generally has no defined vertical limit, but rather it extends
upward to the overlying or adjacent controlled airspace.
There are seven general forms of Class E airspace, all of which are defined
to ensure that aircraft operating on IFR flight plans can remain in controlled
airspace during their entire flight. Any normal IFR flight that leaves the confines of controlled airspace would no longer be offered ATC services, thereby
negating the entire concept of air traffic control and separation. The seven
forms of Class E airspace are as follows:

Figure 3–15. Airport where no SVFR is
allowed.

Air Traffic Control System Structure

/

175

Figure 3–16. Surface area extensions.

1. Surface area designated for an airport. When designated as a surface area for
an airport, sufficient Class E airspace will be designated around the airport to
contain all instrument procedures.
2. Surface area extensions. Class E airspace areas can serve as extensions to
Class B, C, and D surface areas designated for an airport (see Figure 3–16).
Such airspace provides controlled airspace to contain standard instrument
approach procedures without imposing a communications requirement on pilots
operating under VFR.
3. Airspace used for transitions. Class E airspace areas beginning at either 700
or 1,200 feet AGL are used to transition to/from the terminal or en route
environment.
4. En route domestic areas. Class E airspace areas that extend upward from a
specified altitude and are en route domestic airspace areas provide controlled
airspace in those areas where there is a requirement to provide IFR en route
ATC services but the federal airway system is inadequate. Most of the United
States airspace east of the Rocky Mountains and above 1,200 feet AGL has
been designated as Class E airspace.
5. Offshore airspace areas. Class E airspace areas that extend upward from a
specified altitude to, but not including, 18,000 feet MSL are designated as
offshore airspace areas. These areas provide controlled airspace beyond 12 miles
from the coast of the United States in those areas where there is a requirement
to provide IFR en route ATC services and within which the United States is
applying domestic procedures.
6. Continental airspace. Unless designated at a lower altitude, Class E airspace
begins at 14,500 MSL to, but not including, 18,000 feet MSL overlying the
forty-eight contiguous states including the waters within 12 miles from the coast
of the forty-eight contiguous states; the District of Columbia; Alaska, including

176 / CHAPTER 3
the waters within 12 miles from the coast of Alaska, and that airspace above
FL 600; excluding the Alaska peninsula west of long. 160°00-00-W; and the
airspace below 1,500 feet above the surface of the Earth unless specifically so
designated.
7. Federal airways. Federal airways are Class E airspace areas and, unless
otherwise specified, extend upward from 1,200 feet to, but not including,
18,000 feet MSL. This includes the colored airway system that uses NDBs for
navigation and the VOR airways.

Federal
Airways

FARs 71 and 93 define the structure of the federal airway system. The federal
airways are divided into two general types: colored airways and the VOR
airway system. The colored airways use NDBs and four-course radio ranges
for navigation. With the exception of coastal areas, colored airways no longer
exist within the continental United States but are still used in Alaska and
Canada. They are sometimes used to provide temporary airways when a VOR
malfunctions or is being relocated. VOR-based airways have been the standard
for aviation navigation in the continental United States since the late 1950s.
Every federal airway is designated by the FARs as either a low-altitude
airway or a jet route. Low-altitude airways are defined in FAR 71 and use
both low- and high-altitude VORs for navigation. All low-altitude airways are
assigned distinctive route numbers that are prefixed with the letter V and are
known as victor airways (since victor is the phonetic pronunciation of the letter
V). For example, V-251 is known as “victor two fifty-one.”
Low-altitude airways extend from 1,200 feet above the surface of the
Earth up to, but not including, 18,000 feet above MSL. Jet routes begin at
18,000 feet MSL and extend up to and including 45,000 feet MSL. Highaltitude airways use high-altitude VORs exclusively, are assigned a route
number, and are prefixed with the letter J. These airways are referred to as
jet routes or simply jay routes. For example, J-155 would be pronounced as
“Jay one fifty-five.”
The FAA publishes both low- and high-altitude charts that depict federal
airways. Figure 3–17 provides an example of a low-altitude chart; legends for
reading the chart are provided in Appendix A. There are no airways or jet
routes above 45,000 feet MSL. High-performance aircraft operating at these
altitudes either use RNAV or fly directly from one VOR to the next.

Flight Levels

Since aircraft using high-altitude airways are usually traveling at high airspeeds,
it is difficult to ensure that every aircraft operating within a given area is using
the same altimeter setting. It is imperative that every altimeter measure altitude
above the same reference plane (mean sea level). If two aircraft using different
altimeter settings were flying in close proximity, they could conceivably be at
the same altitude even though their altimeters indicated different altitudes.
Improperly set altimeters increase the potential for near misses and actual midair collisions.
This particular problem is solved for low-altitude aircraft by requiring
that the pilot set the altimeter to the current station pressure at the controlling

Air Traffic Control System Structure

/

177

ATC facility. This procedure ensures that every aircraft operating within the
same area is using the same altimeter setting. This method is not so useful for
aircraft operating at high altitudes, since they are usually flying at a fairly high
airspeed, requiring pilots to constantly adjust their altimeter setting every few
minutes as they pass from one area to another. The possibility that pilots could
inadvertently use an incorrect altimeter setting increases every time they readjust the altimeter. The potential collision probability also increases any time a
pilot fails to readjust the altimeter or when a controller fails to inform the pilot
of the new altimeter setting.
Since pilots operating high-altitude aircraft are not as concerned about
their actual altitude above the ground as low-altitude pilots are, this potential
collision problem can be solved by requiring pilots to reset their altimeters to
29.92 inches of mercury when operating their aircraft at or above 18,000 feet
MSL. The setting of 29.92 inches is known as standard atmospheric pressure,
and 18,000 feet MSL is known as the transition level. Setting the altimeter
to standard pressure when operating at or above the transition level ensures
that every aircraft is using the same altimeter setting and measuring altitude
from a common datum. The only problem with this procedure is that the
altimeter is no longer indicating the true altitude above MSL, which makes
it difficult to determine the aircraft’s true altitude above an obstruction. Fortunately, few obstructions occur at these altitudes. Pilots flying near very
high obstructions are routinely assigned altitudes high enough to guarantee
obstacle clearance.
To reduce the possibility of a pilot mistakenly using the local altimeter
setting when flying on a jet route, any cruising altitude at or above 18,000 feet
MSL is known as a flight level (FL). A flight level is defined as a level of constant atmospheric pressure related to a reference datum of 29.92 inches of
mercury. Each flight level is stated using three digits that represent hundreds
of feet. For example, FL 250 represents a barometric altimeter indication of
25,000 feet.
Because every aircraft operating at or above 18,000 feet is using a common altimeter setting, it can be safely assumed that an aircraft operating at FL
250 will always be 1,000 feet below an aircraft operating at FL 260. These two
aircraft may not actually be at 25,000 feet and 26,000 feet MSL, respectively,
but that is unimportant at these altitudes. The ATC system is primarily concerned that the aircraft are separated by at least 1,000 feet. As aircraft descend
through the transition level (FL 180), pilots reset their altimeter to the local
barometric pressure to again accurately indicate the aircraft’s altitude above
mean sea level.
This becomes increasingly important as the aircraft gets closer to the
ground. The procedure of resetting the altimeter to 29.92 when passing through
the transition level is used worldwide, but the transition level altitude varies
among ICAO member nations. It is at 18,000 feet MSL in North America, but
it may be as low as 3,000 feet MSL in some European countries. This may cause
a problem when controllers are separating aircraft whose pilots are certified
in another country and are accustomed to resetting their altimeter to standard

178 / CHAPTER 3

Figure 3–17a

Air Traffic Control System Structure
/

179

Figure 3–17b Sample low-altitude en route chart.

180 / CHAPTER 3
pressure at a different transition altitude. Problems can also occur at airspace
boundaries between countries with different transition levels.
Flight levels are necessary to ensure that proper separation is being applied
to aircraft operating at high altitudes, but whenever the local altimeter setting
is less than 29.92 inches, FL 180 may actually be less than 1,000 feet above
17,000 feet MSL. Whenever the local altimeter setting is less than 29.92, FL
180 must be considered unusable. If the local barometric pressure drops below
28.92 inches, additional flight levels may become unusable. The following table
from the Air Traffic Control Handbook demonstrates the lowest usable flight
level that may be assigned to aircraft based on the local altimeter setting.
Altimeter Setting

Lowest Usable Flight Level

29.92 in. or higher

FL 180

29.91 in. to 28.92 in.

FL 190

28.91 in. to 27.92 in.

FL 200

Airway
Dimensions

The area reserved for aircraft operating along a federal airway includes the airspace extending laterally 4 nautical miles on either side of the airway’s centerline.
If the airway is more than 102 nautical miles from VOR to VOR, it is widened
to take into consideration the spreading of the radials as they emanate from the
VOR. At a point 51 nautical miles from the VOR, the boundaries of the airway
begin to include the airspace between two lines that diverge from the VOR at an
angle of 4.5° on either side of the airway centerline. If the airway changes direction, it also includes that airspace enclosed by extending the boundary lines of
each segment of the airway. The midway point of the airway is known as the
changeover point (COP). This point is defined as the fix between the two navigational aids that define that particular segment of the airway. The changeover
point is where the pilot ceases to track from the first VOR and begins to track to
the next VOR. Changeover points are not depicted on navigational charts unless
they are located somewhere other than the exact midpoint of the airway.

High-Altitude
Redesign
Project

The high-altitude redesign (HAR) project is the first step in implementing some
fundamental changes in structure to the en route portion of the national airspace system. The HAR project is an attempt to move away from the use of
ground-based navaids and instead using RNP to provide navigation directly
from the departure to destination airports. Pilots will have the flexibility to
choose their routes taking into account personal and airline preferences,
weather, and aircraft performance. This flexibility is known as nonrestrictive
routing (NRR).
HAR will be implemented in phases across the United States and will
depend on both improved ATC and system user capabilities. Initial implementation is planned for altitudes at or above FL 390 in the northwest portion of
the United States. As program experience is gained, additional airspace and
flight levels will be added until all high-altitude airspace overlying the domestic
United States is included.

Air Traffic Control System Structure

/

181

The concept of nonrestrictive routing is that pilots should be permitted to
fly their aircraft on the shortest route from airport to airport. During the en route
phase of flight, this is fairly easy to implement but cannot be used in busier, complex terminal areas or for the departure and arrival portions of a flight. Around
busier airspace areas, transition points called “pitch” and “catch” points will be
established for flights entering or exiting these busy areas. During the departure
phase of flight, ATC will provide a route out to one of many defined “pitch” points,
after which the pilot will be free to define his or her own route of flight. The pilot
will have increased navigational flexibility en route but will be required to navigate
to one of many “catch” points that will be established approximately 200 miles
from the destination airport. These catch points will be established to improve ATC
separation and entry into the terminal airspace around busy airports.
New waypoints will be published on en route navigational charts to define
pitch and catch points and also to facilitate navigation around areas of special
use airspace. Other than these predefined airspace fixes, pilots will define their
route of flight using the newly established navigation reference system (NRS)
instead of using victor airways and jet routes.
Navigation
Reference
System

The navigation reference system is a grid of waypoints overlying the United
States that will be the basis for flight plan filing and operation in the redesigned
high-altitude environment. The NRS, as initially implemented, will establish
waypoints every 30 minutes of latitude and every two degrees of longitude.
Eventually, as experience is gained and airborne navigational receivers increase
in capability and database storage capability, NRS waypoints will have a grid
resolution of 10 minutes of latitude by 1 degree of longitude.
Each NRS waypoint is assigned a five-character designator. The first character for all waypoints within the contiguous forty-eight U.S. states will be a
“K” (which is the ICAO identifier for the United States). The second character
will designate within which ARTCC the waypoint resides.
B

Boston

N

New York

W

Washington

J

Jacksonville

C

Cleveland

I

Indianapolis

T

Atlanta

R

Miami

H

Houston

F

Fort Worth

K

Kansas City

G

Chicago

P

Minneapolis

D

Denver

A

Albuquerque

U

Salt Lake City

L

Los Angeles

S

Seattle

The following two number/one letter combination will represent latitude and
longitude but not in a typical lat-long format. The latitude increment numbers start at the equator, which is designated “00”. Each 10-minute increment
thereafter is then identified by a number between “01” and “90”. The latitude
numbering sequence repeats each 15 degrees of latitude. The longitude letters
start at the prime meridian and go from west to east around the globe repeating
every 26 degrees. For example, the waypoint name KA03W can be identified
as a U.S. waypoint, located in the Albuquerque ARTCC’s area at latitude
N30-30-00 and longitude W104-00-00.

182 / CHAPTER 3
Although this referencing system may initially appear confusing, it will
in fact be much easier to enter into a computer than a long string of latitudelongitude coordinates, and it is easier to build into navigation system internal
error checking protocols.
Example: KA03W
Phraseology: “Kilo Alpha Zero Three Whiskey”

K
United States

A

03

W

Albuquerque Center

30-30-00.
north latitude

104-00-00.
west longitude

Tango Routes

In 2004, the Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association (AOPA) requested the FAA
to establish RNAV routes around or through busy terminal areas. The fixed
location of ground-based navaids precluded efficient routing of aircraft in and
around busy terminal areas. The FAA used the flexibility provided by RNAV to
develop a point-to-point route capability for busy terminal and other restrictive
areas. Those routes are called Tango routes.
Tango routes are not really airways in the classic sense but are designed
to make it easier for aircraft to more efficiently avoid high traffic or restricted
areas. Tango routes help reduce controller workload by providing a published
route in lieu of controllers providing navigation services through use of radar
vectoring along those flight paths.

Class F
Airspace

Class F airspace is not used in the United States. It is used, however, internationally and will be described in Chapter 11.

Class G
Airspace

Airspace defined as Class G airspace is uncontrolled airspace within which
ATC separation services will not be provided to any aircraft, whether IFR or
VFR. The regulations for flight in uncontrolled airspace are quite specific and
place the burden of separation on the pilot. Most of the uncontrolled airspace
in this country is located away from major airports below 1,200 feet AGL. The
following procedures must be followed by any pilot flying in uncontrolled
airspace.
Uncontrolled Airspace IFR Flight IFR flight may be legally conducted in
uncontrolled airspace, although no ATC separation services can be provided
by the FAA. A pilot flying in IFR conditions in uncontrolled airspace assumes
the entire responsibility for air traffic separation and terrain avoidance. Properly qualified pilots may legally operate under instrument flight rules in uncontrolled airspace as long as they adhere to the applicable FARs. Most of these
regulations are found in FAR 91.
Pilots operating in uncontrolled airspace under instrument flight rules
are not required to file a flight plan nor will they receive clearance or separation services from ATC. In fact, air traffic controllers are prohibited
from issuing clearances or providing air traffic separation to IFR aircraft

Air Traffic Control System Structure

/

183

operating in uncontrolled airspace. Since controllers are not informed of
every aircraft operating in uncontrolled airspace, it is impossible for them
to provide separation to these aircraft. In general, pilots wishing to conduct IFR flight in uncontrolled airspace must comply with the following
regulations.
1. The pilot of the aircraft must be properly rated, and the aircraft must be
properly equipped for IFR flight as specified in the FARs.
2. The pilot is solely responsible for navigating and avoiding other IFR or VFR
aircraft.
3. The pilot is responsible for operating the aircraft a safe distance above the
ground.

FAR 91 requires that pilots operating IFR in uncontrolled airspace
maintain an altitude of at least 1,000 feet above any obstruction located
within 5 statute miles of the course to be flown. This rule is not applicable
to aircraft landing or taking off, during which it is the pilot’s responsibility to operate the aircraft a safe distance above obstacles. In theory, during
IFR flight in uncontrolled airspace, the pilot is required to fly at an altitude
appropriate for the direction of flight. The altitudes are specified in FAR 91
but are seldom used since pilots rarely fly IFR in uncontrolled airspace for
any length of time. IFR flight in uncontrolled airspace is usually limited to
arrivals and departures from small airports with limited air traffic control
services.
Uncontrolled Airspace VFR Flight VFR pilots operating in uncontrolled
airspace must adhere to the applicable regulations contained in FAR 91.155.
This regulation specifies the weather conditions that must exist for the pilot to
legally operate VFR. The required weather conditions vary depending on the
aircraft’s cruising altitude and its actual altitude above the ground. To legally
fly VFR in uncontrolled airspace, pilots must comply with the visibility and
cloud distance minima contained in FAR 91.
VFR pilots operating in uncontrolled airspace are not required to file any
type of flight plan or to contact any air traffic control facility (unless they are
entering a designated area where contact is mandatory). It is the responsibility
of VFR pilots to see and avoid any other aircraft that might be within their
immediate vicinity, regardless of whether that aircraft is operating under IFR
or visual flight rules.
ATC Services in Uncontrolled Airspace Air traffic control separation services are not offered to any aircraft operating in uncontrolled airspace unless
an emergency exists. Additional ATC services can be provided, however, on a
workload-permitting basis. If a controller finds it necessary to issue a clearance to an aircraft while it is still within uncontrolled airspace, the Air Traffic
Control Handbook suggests that the following phraseology be used to ensure
that the pilot is aware that ATC services will not begin until the aircraft enters
controlled airspace:

184 / CHAPTER 3
[aircraft call sign], upon entering controlled airspace, [the clearance].
For example:
“N512PU, upon entering controlled airspace, fly heading two seven zero and
join victor two fifty-one.”

Special Use
Airspace

Regulatory Special Use Airspace In numerous areas scattered around the
United States, it is in national interest to either restrict or completely prohibit
the flight of civilian aircraft. The U.S. government, through the FARs, has designated these areas as special use airspace. Special use airspace is designed to
either confine unique aircraft operations or to entirely prohibit flight within
the specified area. Unless otherwise noted, all of the following examples of
special use airspace are published on VFR and IFR navigation charts and are
designated in appropriate aeronautical publications.
Prohibited Areas A prohibited area is airspace where aircraft operations are
absolutely prohibited by law. These areas are directly concerned with either
national security or public safety. Among the prohibited areas are the White
House, the Capitol Building, and Camp David. FAR 91.133 expressly prohibits either IFR or VFR aircraft from entering such areas without specific (and
very rarely granted) authorization. Air traffic controllers are not permitted to
authorize civilian aircraft operations within these areas unless an emergency
exists (see Figure 3–18).
Every prohibited area is designated using a unique identifying number
prefixed with the letter P. Prohibited areas are prominently marked on both IFR
and VFR navigation charts to assist pilots in avoiding them. Federal airways
are routed around prohibited areas, but VFR pilots must be familiar with their
locations and plan their flight path accordingly.

Restricted Areas Locations where aircraft operations are not absolutely
prohibited but are subject to various restrictions, are labeled restricted
areas. They are located where both airborne and ground-based activities
are routinely conducted that may be hazardous to either the aircraft or its
occupants. These activities include artillery firing, aerial gunnery, and highenergy laser and missile testing. Some restricted areas are in effect
24 hours a day, whereas others operate part-time. The part-time
restricted areas, also known as joint use areas, are available for
civilian flight whenever they are not active.
The FAA facility that has been given responsibility for the
airspace containing a joint use restricted area will be notified by
the appropriate agency when the restricted area becomes active.
At these times, it becomes the air traffic controller’s responsibilFigure 3–18. Prohibited,
ity to issue clearances to keep IFR aircraft out of the restricted
restricted, or warning area as
area. VFR aircraft are expected to contact appropriate ATC facilidepicted on a sectional chart.
ties when approaching restricted areas to determine their status.

Air Traffic Control System Structure

/

185

VFR pilots are required to provide their own separation from restricted areas,
although they may request navigational assistance from ATC facilities. When
the restricted area is not active, it may be released by the controlling agency to
the appropriate ATC facility, and controllers may permit both IFR and VFR
aircraft to use the restricted space. Restricted areas are prominently marked on
both VFR and IFR charts and are identified by a unique number prefixed with
the letter R (see Figure 3–18).
Temporary Flight Restrictions The FAA may impose temporary flight restrictions (TFRs) around any incident or accident that has the potential for attracting a sufficient number of aircraft to create a hazard to either other aircraft in
the air or people on the ground. Temporary flight restrictions may be imposed
around earthquake, flood, fire, or aircraft crash sites. TFRs essentially operate
like temporary, ad-hoc restricted areas.
When a temporary flight restriction is imposed, the FAA notifies pilots by
issuing a notice to airmen (NOTAM). These notices are distributed nationwide
to FAA air traffic control towers, air route traffic control centers, and flight service stations, who then relay the information to pilots. In addition, NOTAMs
are transmitted to the airlines, military services, and many independent pilotbriefing companies who make the information available to their subscribers.
When issued, a NOTAM defines the physical location, dimension, and duration
of the restriction to flight. The NOTAM usually explains which aircraft are
permitted to operate within the TFR. These aircraft include:
• Aircraft participating in disaster relief that have been approved by the FAA.
• IFR aircraft properly cleared through the restricted area by ATC.

VFR pilots are required by FAR 91 to avoid these areas unless it is absolutely
impossible to do so. IFR aircraft are rerouted by ATC around temporary flight
restrictions.
Domestic ADIZ As a result of the attacks on the Washington, D.C. area in
2001, the FAA has established the Washington, D.C. Metropolitan Area Air
Defense Identification Zone (DC ADIZ) and the Washington, D.C. Metropolitan Flight Restricted Zone (DC FRZ). These zones are considered to be
National Defense Airspace and there are very specific penalties for violating
the rules pursuant to flying within this airspace. A pilot who violates the rules
concerning operations in this airspace may be subject to both civil and criminal
penalties under the law. Pilots who do not adhere to the proper procedures will
likely be intercepted in flight, directed to a safe landing area, and detained and
interviewed by law enforcement personnel.
The DC FRZ extends outward roughly 30 nm in radius from Washington,
D.C. and extends vertically from the ground up to, but not including, FL 180.
Aircraft are to remain clear of this area unless they are properly equipped with
radios and transponders, have filed a special flight plan and received clearance
to enter or exit the ADIZ. Aircraft will be issued a special, discrete transponder

186 / CHAPTER 3
code and must maintain radio and radar contact with air traffic control at all
times. Failure or inability to maintain contact requires that the pilot remains
clear of the ADIZ.
Nonregulatory Warning Areas A warning area is airspace located over international waters
where operations that may be hazardous to nonparticipating aircraft are
Special Use
routinely conducted. The activities conducted in a warning area are usually
Airspace
similar to those performed in a restricted area (see Figure 3–18). Since the
warning areas are located in international airspace, neither the United States
nor any other government has the right to restrict the flight of aircraft through
these areas. Both IFR and VFR aircraft may operate in warning areas, but
they do so at their own risk. International civil aviation organization rules
require that signatory nations advise each other when military activities are
being conducted within warning areas. Fortunately, most of the developed
nations of the world are members of ICAO and abide by this regulation. The
military authority conducting the exercise will usually advise the responsible
ATC facility of the type of activity and its expected duration.
Military Operations Area A military operations area (MOA) is designated
airspace where military flight training activities routinely take place that might
prove hazardous to civilian aircraft. Some of the flight training being conducted
by military aircraft requires acrobatic maneuvers to be practiced on or near a
federal airway. Although acrobatic flight along a federal airway is forbidden
by FAR 91, the Department of Defense has been exempted from this regulation
if the maneuvers are conducted within an MOA. Although military training
flights are usually conducted in VFR flight conditions, the rapid changes in
aircraft attitude required during these training maneuvers make it extremely
difficult for the military pilot to “see and avoid” civilian aircraft. It is for this
reason that military operations areas were created.
When the appropriate military authority advises the FAA that an MOA
is active, air traffic controllers are required to reroute IFR aircraft around the
MOA. VFR pilots are permitted to enter an MOA at any time but do so at their
own risk. MOAs are depicted on both VFR and IFR navigation charts and are
given identifying names followed by the letters MOA (see Figure 3–19).
Alert Areas Alert areas are areas that may contain a large number of highperformance military training aircraft conducting routine training exercises
(see Figure 3–20). Although there are no legal restrictions to civilian aircraft
flying through an alert area, both IFR and VFR pilots transiting the area should
be aware of the large numbers of VFR military aircraft that may be practicing
nonacrobatic high-speed maneuvers there.
Controlled Firing Areas Controlled firing areas contain activities that, if
not conducted in a controlled environment, could be hazardous to aircraft.
These areas are not identified on VFR and IFR charts since the controlling
agency suspends its activities whenever nonparticipating aircraft approach the

Air Traffic Control System Structure

/

187

Figure 3–19. Military operations area as depicted on a sectional chart.

Figure 3–20. Alert area as depicted on a sectional chart.

area. Such aircraft are usually detected by the use of spotter aircraft, radar, or
ground-based observers. Whenever intrusion of a nonparticipating aircraft into
a controlled firing area is detected, the test firings are halted until the aircraft
in question has departed the area. Controlled firing areas predominantly affect
low flying aircraft since most test firing is conducted at these altitudes.
National Security Areas National security areas (NSAs) consist of airspace
established at locations where increased security and safety of ground facilities are required. Pilots are requested to voluntarily avoid flying through NSAs
whenever possible. When it is necessary to provide a greater level of security
and safety, flight in NSAs may be temporarily prohibited by regulation under
the provisions of FAR 99.
Airport
Advisory
Areas

These nonregulatory areas exist at airports where a flight service station is
located but where there is no operating air traffic control tower. An airport
advisory area is 10 statute miles in radius around the airport. Flight service
station personnel will offer weather information and traffic reports to arriving
and departing aircraft, but will not offer any separation services to aircraft. It
is not mandatory that pilots use airport advisory services, but it is highly recommended by the FAA that they do so.

Military
Training
Routes

To remain sufficiently proficient to perform their duties, many military pilots
are required to practice low-level, high-speed combat-training flights. The
maneuvers performed during these training flights make the “see and avoid”
concept of traffic separation difficult without increased vigilance on the part of
both military and civilian pilots. To assist civilian pilots to avoid these military
aircraft, the FAA and the Department of Defense (DOD) have mutually agreed

188 / CHAPTER 3

Figure 3–21. Military training
route as depicted on a sectional
chart.

to participate in the military training route (MTR) program. Through this program, designated MTR routes have been agreed to by both the FAA and the
DOD and are depicted on VFR navigation charts (see Figure 3–21).
Every military training route has been assigned a unique identifying designator composed of two letters and either three or four numbers. The first two
letters are either IR (instrument rules) or VR (visual rules) for the type of military operation that will be conducted. Military pilots flying on IR-designated
routes are provided IFR separation and must remain in contact with FAA controllers during the entire flight. An IR MTR route is flown under instrument
flight rules and requires the pilot to file a flight plan and receive an ATC clearance. Military aircraft operating on VR-designated routes use VFR “see-andavoid” flight rules. These routes are used only when weather conditions permit
the entire flight to be conducted in VFR conditions.
An MTR designator containing three numbers signifies that the pilot will
fly the MTR at an altitude that may be both above and below 1,500 feet AGL.
Four numbers in the designator means that the entire MTR will be flown at
an altitude at or below 1,500 feet AGL. For example, IR 101 is an MTR that
would be flown in IFR conditions, with altitude segments that might be both
above and below 1,500 feet AGL. VR 4002 is an MTR that would be flown in
VFR conditions at or below 1,500 feet AGL.
Civilian aircraft are not prohibited from flying in the vicinity of an MTR,
but pilot contact with a nearby ATC facility is recommended. Any flight service
station within 100 miles of the MTR route will be advised by the controlling
authority when the MTR is active. It is the VFR pilot’s responsibility to determine
whether the MTR is in use. Civilian IFR aircraft will always be separated from
military aircraft operating on IR-designated MTRs but will not be separated
from aircraft flying on a VR MTR. It is the civilian IFR pilot’s responsibility to
remain vigilant and avoid any aircraft using a VR military training route.

Air Traffic Control System Structure

/

189

KEY TERMS
above ground level (AGL)
air traffic control
Air Traffic Control Handbook
airport advisory areas
airport radar service area (ARSA)
alert areas
changeover point (COP)
controlled airspace
controlled firing areas
departure procedure (DP)
Direct User Access Terminal
(DUAT)
expect further clearance (EFC)
federal airways
flight level (FL)
flight restricted zone (FRZ)

high-altitude redesign (HAR)
jet advisory area
military operations area (MOA)
military training route (MTR)
minimum en route altitude
(MEA)
mode C altitude encoder
national airspace review (NAR)
national security areas (NSAs)
notice to airmen (NOTAM)
positive controlled airspace (PCA)
positive separation
prohibited area
restricted area
special use airspace
special VFR (SVFR)

standard atmospheric pressure
standard terminal arrival route
(STAR)
target resolution
temporary flight restriction
(TFR)
terminal control area (TCA)
terminal radar service area
(TRSA)
transition level
uncontrolled airspace
vectors
victor airways
warning areas
waypoint
workload permitting

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. What is the purpose of controlled airspace?
2. What is the difference between a jet route and an airway?
3. What must the pilot do when climbing through the transition level?
4. What is the primary difference between Class A and Class C airspace?
5. How are aircraft separated differently in Class B versus Class C airspace?
6. In what airspace areas are transponders mandatory?

4
Airport Air Trafﬁc Control
Communications: Procedures
and Phraseology
Checkpoints
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
1. State the required components of a clearance.
2. Describe what “cleared as ﬁled” means.
3. State which frequency bands are used for aviation communications.
4. State the purpose of coordinated universal time and explain how it is
measured.
5. Describe how parallel runways are numbered.
6. Describe the standard measurement for speed in aviation.
7. Identify the function of a pilot’s discretion clearance.
8. Describe a holding pattern and identify how it is used.
9. Distinguish between proper and improper uses of phraseology.

Airport Air Trafﬁc Control Communications

/

191

The safe operation of the nation’s air traffic control system ultimately depends
on reliable and accurate communication between pilots and air traffic controllers. Virtually every instruction, procedure, or clearance used to separate or
assist aircraft relies on written or verbal communication. Any miscommunication between participants in the air traffic control system might contribute to
or even be the direct cause of an aircraft accident with a subsequent loss of
life. For this reason, proper and correct communications procedures must be
observed by both pilots and controllers.
Many of the accidents and incidents that have occurred over the last
fifty years can be attributed to improper or misunderstood communications.
Although many improvements to the air traffic control communications system
have made it less reliant on verbal or written communication, pilots and controllers will continue to rely on human communication well into the twenty-first
century. Thus, controllers must possess a proper understanding of communications procedures and phraseology.
American pilots and controllers are fortunate that the International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO) has designated English as the international language for ATC communications worldwide. This standard reduces the number
of words and communications procedures that American controllers need to
learn. However, air traffic controllers should realize that although foreign pilots
are able to communicate using English, they probably do not have full command of the language. Thus, phraseology and slang not approved by ICAO or
the FAA should never be used when communicating with foreign pilots. It is
also recommended that standard phraseology be used when communicating
with American pilots or controllers. Using standard procedures will help reduce
the risk of miscommunication.

Radio Communication
Ever since radio communications equipment was installed in the Cleveland,
Ohio control tower in 1936, radio has become the primary means of pilot–
controller communication in the U.S. air traffic control system. Although the
type of radio equipment has since changed, the basic principles of radio communication remain the same today.
Simplex
versus
Duplex

The earliest type of radio communication used in the air traffic control system
was one way. Controllers could communicate with pilots, but not vice versa.
Since the required radio equipment in those early years was quite bulky and
heavy, airlines were reluctant to install both a navigation receiver and a communications transmitter on each aircraft. Thus, most aircraft were equipped
only with a navigation receiver.
Ground-based navaids were eventually modified to permit controllers to
transmit instructions using the navigation aid frequencies. At first, this communication rendered the navaid useless while the controller was transmitting,

192 / CHAPTER 4
but later advances permitted the controller to transmit using the navaid while
still allowing the pilot to use the ground station for navigation.
As the benefits of radio communication became increasingly evident,
aircraft operators chose to add transmitting equipment to their planes. The
equipment operated on a different set of frequencies to eliminate any possible
interference with the ground-based navaids. This development created its own
set of problems, however. The addition of a separate transmitter and receiver
markedly increased the weight of the aircraft, and adding separate transmitters
and receivers in each control tower required an additional expenditure. Furthermore, during the transition from the navaid-based communication system,
aircraft not equipped with transceivers would be unable to communicate with
the control towers.
An interim solution was to install receiving equipment in the control
towers and transmitting equipment in the aircraft. This system still used the
ground-based navaids for tower-to-aircraft communication but used the newly
installed radios for aircraft-to-tower communication. To eliminate navaid
interference, the aircraft transmitters used a different frequency from that used
by the ground-based navaids. This two-frequency system is known as duplex
communications (see Figure 4–1).
Duplex was used in the air traffic control system for many years and is
still used in some parts of the United States. In particular, FAA flight service
stations are usually equipped to receive on one frequency while transmitting to
the aircraft over a local VORTAC. The duplex system has disadvantages, however, that spurred the development of a radio system that would permit pilots

Separate
frequency

Transmitter

Figure 4–1. Duplex transmission principles.

Receiver

Airport Air Trafﬁc Control Communications

/

193

Same
frequency

Transmitter/receiver

Figure 4–2. Simplex transmission principles.

to communicate with controllers using one discrete frequency. This system was
finally implemented within the ATC system and is known as simplex communications (see Figure 4–2). For the most part, every ATC facility in the United
States relies primarily on simplex communications.
Frequency
Assignments

Various international agreements allocate certain radio frequency bands for use
in aeronautical communications. These frequency bands exist primarily in the
high (HF), very high (VHF), and ultra-high (UHF) spectrums. High frequencies
are primarily used for long-range communication, since these frequencies are
not line of sight and can follow the curvature of the Earth. Only a few ATC
facilities, such as ARTCCs with oceanic responsibility, find a need to use these
frequencies.
Most U.S. ATC facilities use both VHF and UHF for routine air-to-ground
communication. UHF radio equipment is primarily used by military aircraft,
whereas VHF is used by both military and civilian aircraft. The frequencies
used in ATC communications are assigned by the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) in cooperation with the FAA. Since there is not a sufficient
number of available frequencies in either the VHF or UHF spectrum to permit
every ATC facility to operate using a separate frequency, the FCC often assigns
the same frequency to two or more ATC facilities. Because the radio transmissions from high-altitude aircraft travel farther than those from low-flying
aircraft, the FCC must carefully determine any potential interference problems
before assigning these frequencies.

194 / CHAPTER 4
To simplify the task of assigning frequencies, the FCC has assigned these
blocks of VHF bands for the following uses:

Radio
Operation

Frequencies

Use

108.000–117.950

Navigation aids

118.000–121.400

Air traffic control

121.500

Emergency search and rescue

121.600–121.925

Airport utility and ELT test

121.950

Aviation instructional and support

121.975

FSS private aircraft advisory

122.000–122.050

En route flight advisory service (EFAS)

122.075–122.675

FSS private aircraft advisory

122.700–122.725

UNICOM

122.750

Aircraft air-to-air

122.775

Aviation instruction and support

122.800

UNICOM

122.825

Domestic VHF

122.850

Multicom

122.875

Domestic VHF

122.900

Multicom

122.925

Multicom

122.950

Unicom

122.975–123.000

Unicom

123.050–123.075

Unicom

123.100

Aeronautical search and rescue

123.125–123.275

Flight test stations

123.300

Aviation support

123.325–123.475

Flight test stations

123.500

Aviation support

123.525–123.575

Flight test stations

123.600–123.650

FSS air carrier advisory

123.675–128.800

Air traffic control

126.200

Air traffic control (military common)

128.825–132.000

Domestic VHF (operational control)

132.025–136.975

Air traffic control

Most air traffic controllers use radio equipment to perform their ATC duties.
This equipment may be either fairly simple or very complex, depending on the
capabilities of the facility. In general, each controller is assigned one or more
radio frequencies for communications with pilots and has access to telephone
equipment that permits communication with other controllers in the same

Airport Air Trafﬁc Control Communications

/

195

facility or in adjacent facilities. The design of the voice switching system installed
in most ATC facilities is sophisticated enough to permit such communication
effortlessly.
Most controllers are outfitted with a boom mike and headset assembly
that permits them to move freely around the facility while still remaining in
contact with the pilots. Other controllers may use standard microphones and
speakers or telephone handsets provided by the local telephone company (which
is known throughout the FAA by the generic term TELCO). Each controller has
a switching panel to choose whether to communicate with other controllers or
to the pilot over the radio. The system is designed so that when the controller is
communicating on one particular channel, any message sent to him or her on
either the radio or another landline is routed through an overhead speaker.
Most facilities are equipped such that every frequency assigned to that facility
can be used by any controller there.
Standard
Phraseology
for Verbal
Communications

To ensure that miscommunication is kept to a minimum, it is imperative that
controllers use the standard phraseology and procedures that have been recommended by ICAO and the FAA. When communicating with pilots or other
controllers, a controller should always use the following message format:
1. Identification of the aircraft or controller being contacted. This serves to alert
the intended receiver of the upcoming transmission.
2. Identification of the calling controller. This serves to identify who is initiating
the communication.
3. The contents of the message. The message format should conform to standards
approved by the FAA.
4. Termination. In communications with another ATC facility, the message should
be terminated with the controller’s assigned operating initials. This procedure
simplifies identification of the controller if a subsequent investigation is necessary.

Certain letters and numbers may sound similar to each other when spoken over
low-fidelity radio or telephone equipment. In addition, accents and dialects
may make it difficult to discern and identify the exact content of a message. To
alleviate this problem, a standard for pronunciation of letters and numbers has
been approved by ICAO and adopted by the FAA. This standard is presented in
Table 4–1. The standardized pronunciations should be used by controllers
whenever communicating with pilots or other controllers. Air traffic controllers should also use the following standardized phraseology when passing along
control instructions or various information to pilots or to other controllers.
Numbers Each number should be enunciated individually unless group form
pronunciation is stipulated. For example:
Number

Group Form
Pronunciation

Individual
Pronunciation

1

One

One

10

Ten

One zero

196 / CHAPTER 4
Table 4–1.

Standard Phraseology for Numbers and Letters
Character

Word

Pronunciation

0

Zero

Zee-ro

1

One

Wun

2

Two

Too

3

Three

Tree

4

Four

Fow-er

5

Five

Fife

6

Six

Six

7

Seven

Sev-en

8

Eight

Ait

9

Nine

Nin-er

A

Alpha

Al-fah

B

Bravo

Brah-voh

C

Charlie

Char-lee

D

Delta

Del-ta

E

Echo

Eck-oh

F

Foxtrot

Foks-trot

G

Golf

Golf

H

Hotel

Hoh-tell

I

India

In-dee-ah

J

Juliett

Jewlee-ett

K

Kilo

Key-loh

L

Lima

Lee-mah

M

Mike

Mike

N

November

Nov-em-ber

O

Oscar

Oss-cah

P

Papa

Pah-pah

Q

Quebec

Key-beck

R

Romeo

Row-me-oh

S

Sierra

See-air-ah

T

Tango

Tang-go

U

Uniform

You-nee-form

V

Victor

Vik-tah

W

Whiskey

Wiss-key

X

X-ray

Ecks-ray

Y

Yankee

Yang-key

Z

Zulu

Zoo-loo

Airport Air Trafﬁc Control Communications

Number

Group Form
Pronunciation

Separate
Pronunciation

15

Fifteen

One five

132

One thirty-two

One three two

569

Five sixty-nine

Five six niner

/

197

Unless otherwise specified, when serial numbers are pronounced, each digit
should be enunciated individually.
Altitudes Unless otherwise specified, every altitude used in the ATC system
is measured above mean sea level (MSL). The only routine exception is cloud
ceilings, which are measured above ground level (AGL). A controller who must
issue an AGL altitude to a pilot should advise the pilot that the altitude is above
ground level. Altitudes should be separated into thousands and hundreds, and
the thousands should be pronounced separate from the hundreds. Each digit of
the thousands number should be enunciated individually, whereas the hundreds
should be pronounced in group form:
Altitude

Pronunciation

3,900

Three thousand niner hundred

12,500

One two thousand five hundred

17,000

One seven thousand

Flight Levels Flight levels should be preceded by the words “flight level,” and
each number should be enunciated individually:
Flight Level

Pronunciation

180

Flight level one eight zero

390

Flight level three niner zero

Minimum Descent or Decision Height Altitudes Minimum descent or decision
height altitudes published on instrument approach procedure charts should be
prefixed with the type of altitude, and each number in the altitude should be
enunciated individually:
Altitude

Pronunciation

MDA 1,950

Minimum descent altitude one niner five zero

DH 620

Decision height six two zero

Time Since numerous ATC procedures require the use of time, a common system of time measurement is essential to the safe operation of the ATC system.
The FAA and ICAO have agreed that local time is not to be used within the
ATC system. Instead, every ATC facility around the world must use the same

198 / CHAPTER 4
GMT – 8
hours

GMT – 6
hours

GMT – 5
hours

9:00 A.M. 10:00 A.M. 11:00 A.M.

12:00 P.M.

Pacific
standard
time

Pacific standard
time meridian
120°

GMT – 7
hours

Mountain
standard
time

Central
standard
time

Eastern
standard
time

Mountain standard
time meridian

Central standard
time meridian

105°

90°

Eastern standard
time meridian
75°

Figure 4–3. Time zones across the United States.

time standard, known as coordinated universal time (UTC). UTC is the same as
local time in Greenwich, England, which is located on the 0° line of longitude,
also known as the prime meridian. UTC was previously known as Greenwich
mean time (GMT).
The use of UTC around the world eliminates the question of which time
zone a facility or aircraft is located in (see Figure 4–3). In addition, UTC eliminates
the need for “a.m.” and “p.m.” by using a 24-hour clock system. UTC is always
issued as a four-digit number, and the word “o’clock” is never pronounced. The
conversion from a 12-hour clock to a 24-hour clock is fairly simple:
Any time that has fewer than four digits should be prefixed with a zero.
Any time between midnight and noon (a.m.) is not converted to a 24-hour
clock.
Any time between noon and midnight (p.m.) always has twelve hours added to it
to differentiate it from a.m. time.

For example, 6:20 a.m. becomes 0620, and 6:20 p.m. becomes 1820. Local
time is converted to UTC by either adding or subtracting the number of hours
indicated in the following chart:

Airport Air Trafﬁc Control Communications
Time Zone

Difference

Eastern standard time (EST)

5 hours

Eastern daylight time (EDT)

4 hours

Central standard time (CST)

6 hours

Central daylight time (CDT)

5 hours

Mountain standard time (MST)

7 hours

Mountain daylight time (MDT)

6 hours

Pacific standard time (PST)

8 hours

Pacific daylight time (PDT)

7 hours

Alaskan standard time (AST)

9 hours

Alaskan daylight time (ADT)

8 hours

/

199

To convert from local time to UTC, convert the local time to a 24-hour clock, and
then add the required time difference. To convert from UTC to local time, subtract
the difference and convert from a 24-hour to a 12-hour format. For example:
4:35 a.m. (EST) is 0435 (EST), which is 0935 (UTC)
9:13 p.m. (PDT) is 2113 (PDT), which is 0413 (UTC)
1125 (UTC) is 0425 (MST), which is 4:25 a.m. (MST)

To prevent any confusion when issuing time to the pilot, the controller should
suffix any UTC time with the word “zulu” and any local time with the word
“local.” Any issuance of time should also be preceded by the word “time.”
When issuing time, the controller should enunciate each digit individually:
Time (12-hour clock)

Time (24-hour clock)

Pronunciation

6:20 a.m.

0620

Time zero six two zero zulu

1:35 p.m.

1335

Time one three three five zulu

Altimeter Settings The pilot must be issued the proper barometric pressure
so that the aircraft’s altimeter can be properly adjusted to indicate altitude
above mean sea level. The controller should issue these altimeter settings by
individually enunciating every digit without pronouncing the decimal point;
the altimeter setting should be preceded by the word “altimeter”:
Altimeter Setting

Pronunciation

29.92

Altimeter two niner niner two

20.16

Altimeter two zero one six

Care should be taken when issuing altimeter settings to foreign pilots. Pilots
from countries that have converted to the metric system no longer measure
barometric pressure in inches of mercury but in millibars. It is the foreign pilot’s
responsibility to convert the issued altimeter setting to millibars or to request a
metric altimeter setting from the controller.

Qualimetrics, Inc.

200 / CHAPTER 4

Figure 4–4. A digital wind direction and velocity
indicator.

Figure 4–5. An analog wind direction and velocity
indicator.

Wind Direction and Velocity Wind direction at airports is always determined
in reference to magnetic north and indicates the direction that the wind is
blowing from. The direction is always rounded off to the nearest 10°. Thus, a
wind blowing from north to south is a 360° wind; a wind from the east is a
90° wind. The international standard for measuring wind velocity requires that
wind speeds be measured in knots; 1 knot equals approximately 1.15 miles per
hour. Wind direction and velocity information is always preceded by the word
“wind,” with each digit of the wind direction enunciated individually. The wind
direction is then followed by the word “at” and the wind velocity in knots, with
each digit enunciated individually. If the wind measurement devices (see Figures
4–4 and 4–5) are inoperative, the wind speed and direction are preceded by the
word “estimated.” If the wind direction is constantly changing, the word “variable” is suffixed to the average wind direction. If the wind velocity is constantly
changing, the word “gusts” and the peak speed are suffixed to the wind speed.
Here are some examples:
Wind Direction

Wind Speed

Pronunciation

From the north

15 knots

Wind three six zero at one five

From the east

10 knots with
occasional gusts
to 25 knots

Wind zero niner zero at one
zero gusts to two five

Variable from
the southeast

12 knots with
occasional gusts
to 35 knots

Wind one five zero variable at
one two gusts to three five

Airport Air Trafﬁc Control Communications

/

201

Wind Direction

Wind Speed

Pronunciation

Estimated from
the southwest

Estimated at
15 knots

Estimated wind two three
zero at one five

Headings Aircraft headings are also measured in reference to magnetic north.
If the heading contains fewer than three digits, it should be preceded by a
sufficient number of zeros to make a three-digit number. Aircraft headings
should always be preceded by the word “heading,” with each of the three digits
enunciated individually. Here are some examples:
Heading

Pronunciation

005°

Heading zero zero five

090°

Heading zero niner zero

255°

Heading two five five

Runway Numbers Runways are also numbered in reference to their magnetic
heading. The runway’s number is its magnetic heading rounded to the nearest
10° with leading and trailing zeros removed. For example, a runway heading north would have a magnetic heading of 360°. Dropping the trailing zero
makes this runway number 36. Since the other end of the runway heads the
opposite direction (south, which is a heading of 180°), it is runway 18. Each
digit of a runway number is enunciated individually. Runway designations are
always prefixed with the word “runway,” followed by the runway number and
a suffix, if necessary. For example:
Runway Heading

Runway Number

Pronunciation

090°

9

Runway niner

261°

26

Runway two six

138°

14R

Runway one four right

14C

Runway one four center

14L

Runway one four left

If two or three runways are constructed parallel to each other, the suffixes L for
“left,” R for “right,” and C for “center” are used to differentiate the runways
from one another (see Figure 4–6). If there are four or more parallel runways,
some may be given a new number fairly close to their magnetic heading such
as the Los Angeles International Airport, which has four parallel runways numbered 25L, 25R, 24L, and 24R.
Radio Frequencies When issuing radio frequencies, the controller should
enunciate each digit individually. Current VHF communications radios use
25 kHz spacing between assigned frequencies. For instance, the next usable
frequency above 119.600 is 119.625, followed by 119.650, 119.675, and
119.700. The first number after the decimal is always pronounced, whether or

202 / CHAPTER 4

23

N

272°

9R

269°

48

°

089°

27L

27C

22
8°

9C

092°

273°

27R

9L

093°

5

Figure 4–6. Runway numbering.

not it is a zero. But if the second number after the decimal is a zero, it is not
pronounced. The third number after the decimal is never pronounced, since it
is always either a zero or a five and can be assumed. Low Frequency/Medium
Frequency used by nondirectional beacons are always pronounced as whole
numbers. VHF and UHF communication and navigation frequencies always
use the decimal point. The decimal should be pronounced as “point.” For
L/MF frequencies, the number should be suffixed with the word “kilohertz.”
Here are some examples:
Frequency

Pronunciation

119.600 mHz

One one niner point six

343.000 mHz

Three four three point zero

123.050 mHz

One two three point zero five

131.725 mHz

One three one point seven two

401 kHz

Four zero one kilohertz

The FAA communications standard differs somewhat from that recommended
by ICAO. Most ICAO member nations use the word “decimal” instead of
“point.” For example, using ICAO procedures, 123.050 would be pronounced
as “One two three decimal zero five.”
MLS or TACAN Channels Microwave landing system and TACAN station
frequencies are not issued explicitly. Channel numbers are used instead. MLS
and TACAN channels are issued as two- or three-digit numbers, with each digit
being enunciated individually. For example:

Airport Air Trafﬁc Control Communications
Channel

Pronunciation

MLS channel 530

M-L-S channel five three zero

TACAN channel 90

TACAN channel niner zero

/

203

Speeds Aircraft speeds, like wind speeds, are always measured in knots.
This occasionally causes some confusion with older general aviation aircraft
equipped with airspeed indicators that indicate in miles per hour. Care should
be taken when issuing speeds to small aircraft to ensure that the pilots realize
that the requested airspeed is measured in knots. A rule of thumb is that an
airspeed in miles per hour is about fifteen percent higher than the equivalent
airspeed in knots. Thus, 100 knots is about 115 miles per hour. Airspeeds are
always expressed with each digit being enunciated individually and suffixed
with the word “knots,” as in the following examples:
Speed

Pronunciation

250

Two five zero knots

95

Niner five knots

Air Traffic Control Facilities ATC facilities are identified by name, using the
name of the city where the facility is located followed by the type of facility or
the operating position being communicated with:
Facility Type

Pronunciation

Local control

Tower

Ground control

Ground

Clearance delivery

Clearance

Air route traffic control center

Center

Flight service station

Radio

Approach control

Approach

Departure control

Departure

Flight watch

Flight watch

If a particular city has two or more airports, the airport name is used instead of
the city name. Approach controls and centers are always named after the largest nearby city. Navy airports are always prefixed with “navy” to differentiate
them from civilian facilities. Here are some examples:
Lafayette Tower
Chicago approach
Indianapolis center
Navy Glenview tower
Terre Haute radio

204 / CHAPTER 4
Route and Navigation Aid Descriptions Airways are always described with
the route identification pronounced in group form. The route number is
prefixed with “victor” if it is a low-altitude airway or “jay” if it is a jet route.
For example:
Route

Pronunciation

V12

Victor twelve

J97

Jay ninety-seven

Radials that emanate from a VOR should be pronounced as a three-digit number with each digit being enunciated individually (similar to the way aircraft
headings are pronounced). The radial number is prefixed with the VOR name
and is always suffixed with the word “radial” (the word “degree” is never used
when describing radials):
Boiler one four three radial
Indianapolis three six zero radial
Champaign zero zero six radial

Bearings from nondirectional beacons (NDBs) are expressed as magnetic bearings from the station and are suffixed with the station’s identifying name and
the words “radio beacon” or “outer compass locator” as appropriate:
Three five five bearing from the Pully radio beacon
Two seven eight bearing from the Earle outer compass locator

Intersections located along an airway are described using either (1) the fiveletter approved intersection name (found in FAA order 7350.5, “Location
Identifiers”), or (2) the VOR radial and DME distance from the VOR. Here
are some examples:
Staks intersection
Flite waypoint
Boiler zero niner zero radial one two mile fix

ATC Communications Procedures
The communications procedures that should be used by air traffic controllers
are detailed in the Air Traffic Control Handbook. Although individual circumstances may require modification of these procedures, adhering to them will
help eliminate confusion and potential problems.

Airport Air Trafﬁc Control Communications

/

205

The remainder of this chapter describes the most common phrases used
by air traffic controllers, including how and when to use each phrase and some
examples of proper phraseology. The terms may be used when communicating in writing as well as orally. To increase efficiency and conserve space when
writing these phrases, standard operating procedure requires that controllers
abbreviate them. The approved abbreviation appears in parentheses after each
phrase.
Clearance

Any IFR or participating VFR aircraft operating within controlled airspace
must be cleared (C) prior to participating in the ATC system. A clearance authorizes a pilot to proceed to a certain point or to perform a specific maneuver.
When issuing a clearance or a control instruction, the controller must identify
the aircraft, identify the ATC facility, and then issue the clearance or instruction. This instruction could be a clearance to take off or land, to perform an
instrument approach procedure, or to proceed to an airport or navigational fix,
as in the following examples:
Phraseology

Explanation

United seven twelve runway two
four cleared for takeoff.

This authorizes the pilot to take off
using runway 24.

Beech eight delta mike, after
departure, turn left and proceed
direct to the Boiler VOR, runway
one zero cleared for takeoff.

This clearance directs the pilot to
turn left after takeoff from runway
10 and proceed to the Boiler VOR.

Delta one ninety-one, after
departure turn right heading
one two zero, runway three
five cleared for takeoff.

After departing runway 35, the
pilot will turn right to a heading
of 120°.

American nine twenty-one cleared
to land runway niner.

This authorizes the pilot to make
a full-stop landing on runway 9.

Aztec seven eight one cleared for
touch and go runway two three.

A touch and go clearance permits
the aircraft to land on the runway
but take off again before actually
coming to a stop. This maneuver is
usually used by students practicing
takeoffs and landings.

Mooney three six charlie cleared
for stop and go runway five.

A stop and go clearance is similar
to a touch and go except that the
aircraft comes to a full stop on
the runway prior to beginning its
takeoff run.

Sport zero two romeo cleared for
low approach runway three two.

In a low approach, the pilot
approaches to land on the runway
but does not actually make contact
with the surface. Upon reaching the
desired altitude, the pilot begins a
climb and departs.

206 / CHAPTER 4
Phraseology

Explanation

Bellanca two bravo zulu cleared for
the option runway two eight left.

An option clearance permits the
pilot to perform a landing, touch
and go, stop and go, or low
approach. The pilot does not
typically inform the controller
which option has been chosen. This
maneuver is used in flight training to
permit flight instructors to evaluate
a student’s performance under
changing conditions.

King Air four papa uniform cleared
for ILS runway one zero approach.

This authorizes the pilot to
conduct the published ILS approach
for runway 10. This
does not authorize landing on the
runway. An additional clearance
is necessary for landing.

Queen Air seven tango yankee
cleared for approach.

This clearance authorizes the pilot
to conduct any instrument approach
procedure at the designated airport.

The word “cleared” is also used when issuing IFR clearances to aircraft prior
to departure. An IFR clearance must include the following items (those marked
with an asterisk are not required in every clearance and are used only when
necessary):
1. Aircraft identification
2. The word “cleared”
3. The clearance limit
*4. Departure instructions
5. The route of flight
6. Altitude assignments
*7. Holding instructions
*8. Any additional information
9. Frequency and transponder code information

Each of these items is discussed in detail in the following sections, with examples of the proper phraseology provided.
Aircraft
Identification

Aircraft are identified using standard procedures that help eliminate confusion
and misdirected instructions. It is vitally important that control information
directed to one aircraft be received by the pilots of that aircraft. It is also exceedingly important that the controller be certain with which aircraft he or she is
communicating. If the pilot of one aircraft were to follow the instructions issued
to another or if the controller were unsure which aircraft had just made a position report, the air traffic control system would be unable to function properly.

Airport Air Trafﬁc Control Communications

/

207

The assigned aircraft identification call signs used by pilots and controllers vary depending on the type of operation in which the aircraft is involved.
If the aircraft is a scheduled airline flight operating under FAR 121 or 125, the
FAA has authorized the use of a distinctive airline name that should be used
when communicating with that aircraft. In addition to this name, every airline
flight has been issued a flight number by the airline itself. The approved aircraft
identification consists of the airline name, followed by the flight number, pronounced in group form (such as “Comair twenty-six eleven”).
Most authorized airline names are easily recognizable, although a few
are somewhat unusual. These approved airline names have been selected to
ensure that no two sound similar. Every airline has also been issued a threeletter designator to be used in written communications concerning the aircraft.
A list of air carrier names and their three-letter identifiers can be found in the
Contractions Handbook published by the FAA. Here are some examples from
the handbook.
Airline Name

FAA Indentifier

Aeromexico

AMX

Call Sign

Aeromexico

Air Canada

ACA

Air Canada

Air China

CCA

Air China

Air France

AFR

Airfrans

Aer Lingus

EIN

Shamrock

Air Wisconsin

AWI

Air Wisconsin

Alaska

ASA

Alaska

American

AAL

American

British Airways

BAW

Speedbird

Cathay Pacific

CPA

Cathay

China Eastern

CES

China Eastern

Continental

COA

Continental

Delta

DAL

Delta

Emirates Airlines

UAE

Emirates

Evergreen

EIA

Evergreen

Federal Express

FDX

Fedex

Frontier

FFT

Frontier

Japan Air Lines

JAL

Japanair

JetBlue

JBU

Jetblue

KLM

KLM

KLM

Mesa

ASH

Air Shuttle

Mexicana

MXA

Mexicana

Midwest

MEP

Midex

Net Jets

NJT

Netjet

Piedmont

PDT

Piedmont

208 / CHAPTER 4
Airline Name

FAA Indentifier

Call Sign

Republic

RPA

Brickyard

Ryanair

RYR

Ryanair

Southwest

SWA

Southwest

Spirit Airlines

NKS

Spiritwings

United Airlines

UAL

United

United Parcel

UPS

UPS

US Airways

USA

Cactus

Virgin America

VRD

Redwood

Virgin Atlantic

VIR

Virgin

WestJet

WJA

Westjet

General aviation aircraft call signs consist of the type of aircraft plus a unique
serial number assigned by the FAA. The call sign may contain up to five numbers or letters. The approved aircraft type can be found in Appendix B of
FAAH7110.65. When the call sign is pronounced, each character is enunciated
individually. Every U.S. aircraft’s serial number is preceded by the letter N,
signifying that it is registered in the United States. During routine communications, this letter is usually not pronounced but can be used if the pilot wishes.
Aircraft registered in other countries have aircraft identification numbers or
letters preceded with a different letter or series of letters.
After initial communication has been established with aircraft, they may
be identified using the last three characters of their assigned serial number if
no confusion will result. In Table 4–2, these abbreviated call signs are enclosed
in parentheses.
If two aircraft have similar last three characters, the full call sign should
be used to help eliminate any confusion.

Table 4–2.

General Aviation Aircraft Call Signals
Aircraft Serial Number

Aircraft Type

Pronunciation

N231PA

Piper Cherokee

Cherokee two three one
papa alpha (Cherokee one
papa alpha)

N98556

Cessna Citation

Citation niner eight five five
six (Citation five five six)

N5102R

Beech Sport

Sport five one zero two
romeo (Sport zero two
romeo)

CF-AMG

Dassault Falcon

Falcon C-F-A-M-G (Falcon
A-M-G)

Airport Air Trafﬁc Control Communications

/

209

General aviation aircraft being used for special purposes are permitted to
use special call sign prefixes that identify their mission. These approved prefixes
are found in the FAA handbook. Here are some examples:
Type of Operation

Preﬁx

Phraseology

Air ambulance

Lifeguard

Lifeguard Cessna two
five one lima november

Air taxi

Tango

Tango Aztec niner
niner three five eight

Military aircraft are assigned a variety of call signs that may include five numbers, one word followed by numbers, or two letters followed by numbers. Each
word is pronounced in full with the letters and numbers enunciated individually. The aircraft’s call sign is always prefixed with the name of the military
service, as in the following examples:
Call Sign

Military Service

Pronunciation

R23956

Army

Army two three niner five six

VV1963

Navy

Navy one niner six three

A14932

Air Force

Air Force one four niner
three two

CAF95

Canadian

Canadian niner five

The approved identification prefixes (found in FAAH 7110.65) are as follows:
Preﬁx

Military Service

A

U.S. Air Force

C

U.S. Coast Guard

CAF

Canadian Armed Force

CAM

Canadian Armed Force (Transport Command)

CTG

Canadian Coast Guard

E

Medical Air Evacuation

F

Flight Check

G

National Guard

L

LOGAIR (USAF civilian contract flight)

M

MAC (Military Airlift Command)

R

U.S. Army

S

Special Air Mission

VM

U.S. Marine Corps

VV

U.S. Navy

To assist air traffic controllers in identifying military training flights that may
require special handling, flights being piloted by students can be suffixed with
the letter Z (“zulu”).

210 / CHAPTER 4
Presidential aircraft have been assigned call signs that alert controllers
that special handling of the aircraft may be required. Anytime the president of
the United States is aboard a military aircraft, the call sign becomes a combination of the military service name and the word “one” (such as “Air Force one,”
“Marine one,” “Navy one”). If the president is aboard a civilian aircraft, the
aircraft’s call sign becomes “Executive one.” If a member of the president’s family is on board an aircraft but the president is not, the call sign is suffixed with
the letter F (“foxtrot”). An aircraft carrying the vice president is identified using
a similar procedure but with the word “two” instead of “one.” Aircraft with the
vice president’s family are identified using the “foxtrot” suffix.
Destination
Airport or
Intermediate
Fix

It is preferable for the aircraft to be cleared to the pilot’s filed destination airport. This procedure enables the pilot to plan the entire flight and provides a
route to the destination in case of radio failure. If the controller is unable to
issue a clearance to the destination airport, the pilot should be cleared to an
intermediate fix and then informed of the expected route. If a delay is likely at
the intermediate fix, the pilot should be informed of the approximate time that
may be spent holding at the fix.

Departure
Instructions

Every departing IFR aircraft must be issued an initial route that will lead from
the airport to the route contained in the clearance. This may be either a published SID route or a heading. The heading should be preceded by one of the
following phrases: “turn right heading” (TR), “turn left heading” (TL), or “fly
heading” (FH). When issued a “fly heading,” the pilot is expected to turn to the
assigned heading in whatever direction that results in the shortest turn. This
phraseology is normally used when the aircraft’s current heading is unknown.
If the controller assigns a particular direction to turn (left or right), the pilot is
required to turn in that direction, regardless of whether it will result in the
shortest turn. Here are some examples:
Pronunciation

Written Version

Cessna niner papa uniform, turn right heading
three five zero

N9PU TR 350

Midwest five six three, fly heading one one zero

MEP563, FH 110

A departing aircraft must be assigned a heading to fly until the pilot intercepts
the assigned airway or route of flight. Normally, the controller will assign the
ⱖ
pilot a heading to fly until the aircraft joins an airway, intercepts [ ] a course
or radial, or can navigate direct [ D ] to the navaid. For example:
Pronunciation

United six eleven, turn right heading one
five zero, join victor ninety-seven
Republic twenty-five forty-one, fly heading
two niner zero, join victor two fifty-one

Written Version

–
UAL611 TR 150 ⬎ V97
–
RPA2541 FH290 ⬎ V251

Kingair three papa uniform, fly runway
N3PU FRH D
heading until able direct the Kokomo VOR

OKK

Airport Air Trafﬁc Control Communications

Route of
Flight

Altitude
Assignment

/

211

The route of flight must consist of an airway, a series of airways, or a series of
navaids that lead to the clearance limit. If the route issued to the pilot is exactly
the same as the route filed in the IFR flight plan, the controller can substitute
the phrase cleared as filed (CAF) instead. However, if the ATC facility at the
departure airport is not equipped with radar, the first airway that will be used
by the pilot should be appended to the “cleared as filed” clearance. This procedure ensures that even if a mistake has been made and the pilot flies a different
route from what the controller expects, at least the initial route of flight will be
correct. If there is a problem later on, it will occur in an area of radar coverage,
where the error can be observed and easily corrected.
If just a minor change is made to the pilot’s filed route of flight, the changed
portion of the route should be issued, followed by the words “then as filed.”
But if any major changes have been made to the pilot’s filed route of flight, the
route portion of the IFR clearance should be prefixed with the phrase “unable
routing requested.” This alerts the pilot that major changes have been made.
Once the aircraft is in flight, if any part of the clearance needs to be
amended, only the amended portion of the clearance should be issued to the
pilot. Here are some examples.
Pronunciation

Written Version

Comair seventeen fourteen, unable routing
requested, cleared to the Chicago O’Hare
Airport via direct Boiler, victor seven
Chicago Heights, direct

COM1714 D BVT V7 CGT

Northwest two twenty cleared to the Los
Angeles Airport as filed

NWA 220 CAF LAX

Beech eight delta mike cleared to the
Chicago Midway Airport via direct Knox,
then as filed

N8DM D OXI CAF MDW

Altitude assignments may be issued to pilots in a number of ways. The following phrases are used to clarify whether the pilot is to remain at a specific altitude or is permitted to climb and descend without the controller’s permission.
Maintain Both IFR and participating VFR pilots are assigned an altitude at
which they are required to fly. IFR pilots are required to maintain ( M ) this
altitude, whereas VFR pilots must make every attempt to do so, but are permitted to change altitude to remain in VFR conditions. When IFR pilots are
assigned a new altitude to maintain, they are required by FAR 91 to advise
the controller when they depart their previously assigned altitude. Unless
specifically requested, they are not required to report when they reach their
newly assigned altitude.
A clearance to maintain an altitude may be modified to include the
prefixes “climb and” [↑] or “descend and” [↓]. These prefixes should be used

212 / CHAPTER 4
when requesting that an aircraft change from one altitude to another. Here are
some examples of “maintain” phraseology:
Pronunciation

Written Version

Sport zero two romeo, maintain three
thousand

N02R M 30

Eastern six fifty-six, climb and maintain
niner thousand

EAL656 c 90

Clipper six ninety, descend and maintain
flight level three five zero

PAL690 T 350

The word “maintain” may also be used when requesting that a pilot remain in
certain weather conditions. If necessary, VFR pilots may be issued a clearance
to maintain VFR. Since VFR pilots are not permitted by FAR 91 to fly IFR in
controlled airspace without a clearance, this clearance is essentially advisory in
nature. In essence, it reminds the pilot that an IFR clearance has not been issued
or is no longer effective and that the aircraft must remain in VFR conditions.
Controllers are not authorized to issue a “maintain VFR” clearance to aircraft
operating under an IFR flight plan unless the pilot specifically requests it. A
VFR clearance to an IFR aircraft is usually used whenever an IFR-rated pilot
wishes to depart on an IFR clearance but upon reaching VFR conditions plans
to cancel the IFR clearance and proceed VFR.
In other circumstances, the pilot may want to remain on an IFR clearance
but be authorized to maintain flight in VFR conditions and to deviate from the
assigned altitude. The pilot does not wish to cancel the IFR clearance since it
may be needed later in the flight. This type of flight is known as VFR on top.
With this type of clearance, the pilot is authorized to change altitudes as long
as VFR conditions can be maintained. A pilot desiring this type of clearance
would be advised to “maintain VFR on top.” Such VFR clearance relinquishes
the controller’s responsibility for separating this aircraft from other IFR aircraft. The pilot assumes the responsibility for remaining in VFR conditions and
for seeing and avoiding other aircraft, both VFR and IFR. If a pilot requests
that an IFR clearance be reissued at some time in the future, the controller must
comply with the request as soon as possible and then assume IFR separation
responsibility for that aircraft.
Cruise A cruise clearance is used by air traffic controllers to authorize an
IFR aircraft to operate at any altitude between the assigned altitude and the
minimum IFR altitude. This clearance permits the pilot to level off and operate
at any intermediate altitude within this assigned block of airspace. However,
once the pilot begins to descend and verbally reports this descent to the controller, he or she may not return to any vacated altitude without additional ATC
clearance. A “cruise” (S) clearance also authorizes the pilot to conduct any
instrument approach procedure published for the destination airport. Cruise
clearances are rarely used but may be assigned to aircraft approaching smaller,
less busy airports that do not have operating air traffic control towers. Here

Airport Air Trafﬁc Control Communications

/

213

is an example of the phraseology: “Cessna niner three uniform, cleared to the
Champaign Airport, cruise six thousand” (N93U CMI S 60).
Cross At There may be situations in which it is operationally advantageous to
require an aircraft to cross a particular navigational fix at a predetermined altitude. When this is required, the controller requests that the pilot “cross” (X) the
fix “at” (@), “at or above” (c), or “at or below” (T) a specified altitude. This procedure is used whenever it is critically important, either for separation or to comply
with ATC procedures, that the aircraft meet the altitude restriction. Whenever a
crossing restriction has been issued, the pilot may change altitude at any desired
rate but must ensure that the crossing restriction is met. If the controller requires
the pilot to change altitude at the aircraft’s optimal rate of climb or descent, the
controller should precede the clearance with the phrase “descend now.”
Pilot’s Discretion Whenever a new altitude is assigned, the pilot is expected to
climb or descend at an optimal rate consistent with the aircraft’s performance.
When the aircraft is within 1,000 feet of the assigned altitude, the pilot should
attempt to decrease the climb or descent rate to approximately 500 feet per
minute. The only exceptions to this procedure are when a crossing restriction
has been issued and when the pilot is permitted to climb or descend at pilot’s
discretion.
If the phrase “at pilot’s discretion” (PD) is used by the controller in conjunction with an altitude assignment, the pilot is given the option of when
to begin the climb or descent. When authorized to change altitude at pilot’s
discretion, the pilot is permitted to level off at any intermediate altitude before
reaching the assigned altitude but is not permitted to return to any altitude previously vacated. An altitude change in conjunction with pilot’s discretion gives
the pilot the opportunity to fly the aircraft in the most efficient manner, saving
both fuel and time. Here are some examples of phraseology:
Pronunciation

Explanation

Air Force one five seven, descend
at pilot’s discretion, maintain flight
level two zero zero

Air Force 157 may begin the descent
at any point and at whatever rate the
pilot wishes. The aircraft may level off
at any intermediate altitude but must
eventually descend to FL 200 and
cannot return to any previously vacated
altitude.

Comanche five niner papa, descend
and maintain three thousand, cross
Vages at or below five thousand

Comanche 59P may begin the descent
at any point and at whatever rate the
pilot wishes. The aircraft may level off
at any intermediate altitude but must
cross Vages at or below 5,000 feet. The
aircraft must eventually maintain 3,000
feet and cannot return to any altitude
previously vacated.

214 / CHAPTER 4

Required
Reports

Pronunciation

Explanation

Gulfstream eight november mike,
climb and maintain flight level two
five zero, cross Potes at one three
thousand

Gulfstream 8NM may climb at any rate
up to FL 250 and may temporarily
level off at any altitude but must cross
the Potes intersection at 13,000 feet.

Mooney eight mike november,
descend now to four thousand,
cross the Boiler VOR at or below
six thousand

Mooney 8MN must initiate a descent
upon receipt of the clearance and must
descend at an optimal rate for that
aircraft. The aircraft must cross the
Boiler VOR at or below 6,000 feet
and must maintain 4,000 feet. The
pilot may not temporarily level off
at any intermediate altitude but may
reduce the aircraft’s rate of descent to
500 feet per minute upon reaching
5,000 feet.

The controller may request reports other than position and altitude from the
pilot. A clearance may include requests to report crossing, reaching, or leaving.
Report Crossing Following a report crossing (RX) request, the pilot will
advise the controller when the aircraft crosses the requested fix or intersection.
Examples of phraseology include the following:
Falcon four two quebec, report crossing Staks (N42Q RX STAKS)
King air four papa uniform, report crossing the Danville one two seven radial,
three six mile fix (N4PU RX DNV 127/36)

Report Reaching Following a report reaching (RR) request, the pilot will
advise the controller when the aircraft has leveled off at the newly assigned
altitude. For example:
Dehavilland one six echo, climb and maintain seven thousand, report reaching
(N16E c 70 RR)
Fairchild, eight sierra victor, report reaching flight level one niner zero (M8SV
RR 190)

Report Leaving A report leaving (RL) clearance is used by the controller
to require a pilot to report passing through any intermediate altitude. FAR
91 requires that every pilot advise the controller when leaving a previously
assigned altitude but not when reaching an assigned altitude. “Report leaving”
may be phrased as follows:
Lear seven golf juliett, descend and maintain six thousand, report leaving flight
level one niner zero, report leaving one one thousand (N7GJ T 60 RL190 RL
110)

Airport Air Trafﬁc Control Communications

Holding
Instructions

/

215

If traffic conditions warrant, pilots may be cleared by air traffic controllers to
enter a holding pattern. Holding patterns may be necessary when aircraft must
remain clear of a specific controller’s area because of traffic saturation at the
destination airport. Holding patterns require that the pilot fly a modified racetrack pattern in reference to a fix or a navaid. Holding patterns vary in size
depending on the aircraft type and the holding altitude. Holding patterns are
used primarily in areas without radar coverage. The proper application of holding patterns when separating aircraft is discussed in Chapter 7. The phraseology that air traffic controllers should use when issuing a holding instruction is
as follows:
1. State the direction of holding from the fix. This is the location of the inbound
course in relation to the holding fix or navigation aid. The direction of holding is
issued using one of the eight points of the compass (“Cherokee two papa uniform,
hold west”).
2. State the name of the holding fix to be used. This is the fix or the navigation
aid that the aircraft will actually hold at. It can be a VOR, an NDB, an intersection of
two VOR radials, an intersection of two NDB bearings, an intersection defined using
a VOR radial and an NDB bearing, a DME fix, or any intersection that lies along
the final approach course of an instrument approach (“of Boiler,” “of Staks,” “of the
Boiler two seven zero radial, one two mile fix”).
3. State the radial, course, bearing, azimuth, or route on which the aircraft will
hold (“on victor nine,” “on the two seven zero radial,” “on the one two three bearing
to the Earle outer compass locator,” “on the localizer course”).
4. State the holding-pattern leg length in miles if DME or RNAV is to be used or
in minutes if a nonstandard holding pattern is required. If this section is omitted in the
clearance, the pilot will use a standard holding pattern, which is defined as a 1-minute
inbound leg if holding is accomplished at or below 14,000 feet MSL or a 1½-minute
inbound leg if holding is accomplished above 14,000 feet MSL (“two-minute legs,”
“seven-mile legs”).
5. State the direction of the holding pattern turns if a nonstandard (left turn)
holding pattern is necessary. If this phrase is omitted by the controller, the pilot is
expected to use right turns while in the holding pattern (“Left turns”).
6. State the projected time (UTC) when the controller estimates that the pilot
will be permitted to exit the holding pattern and continue on course. This is known
as the expect further clearance (EFC) time. If radio communication between
the pilot and the controller is lost, the pilot will depart the holding pattern and
continue on course when the EFC time has passed. When the holding instructions
are originally issued, the controller should also inform the pilot of the current UTC
time (“Expect further clearance at one two five five zulu, time now one two zero
five zulu”).

Here are two examples of full holding messages (see Figures 4–7 and 4–8):
Sport zero two romeo, hold west of the Earle outer compass locator on the
localizer, two-minute legs, left turns, expect further clearance at zero niner zero
zero, time now zero eight four five.

216 / CHAPTER 4

Localizer
2 min.

Earle
LOM

Figure 4–7. Example of an aircraft holding west of the Earle LOM on the localizer
course, using two-minute legs left turns.

323° Radial

1 min.

BVT
VOR

Figure 4–8. Example of an aircraft holding northwest of the BVT VOR on the 323°
radial.

United six eleven, hold northwest of the Boiler VOR on the three two three radial,
expect further clearance at one one two five zulu, time now one one zero five.

Whenever the controller determines that the aircraft can be permitted to leave the
holding fix and continue on course, the following procedure should be used:
1. Issue the new clearance limit.
2. Issue the route of flight to the clearance limit. If there has been no change in the
route since the aircraft entered the holding pattern, the phrase “via last routing
cleared” may be used.
3. Restate the assigned altitude.

Airport Air Trafﬁc Control Communications

/

217

Here are examples of the proper phraseology:
American six fifty-four is cleared to the Chicago O’Hare Airport via last routing
cleared, maintain flight level one eight zero.
Jetstream nine alpha victor is cleared to the Champaign VOR via direct the
Danville VOR and victor two fifty-one, maintain five thousand.

Whenever the aircraft has been cleared to leave the holding pattern, the
pilot is expected to remain in the holding pattern until the aircraft crosses
the holding fix, then proceed on course. The pilot is not expected to take
any shortcuts.

Additional Communications
Phraseology
When appended to a controller’s transmission, the word “acknowledge”
requests that the pilot inform the controller that the message in question has
been received:
CONTROLLER: Cessna two mike november, cleared to land. Acknowledge.
PILOT:
Cessna two mike november understands cleared to land.

The word “affirmative” means the same as “yes” but is more understandable
when spoken over the radio.
The word “negative” means the same as “no” but is more understandable
when spoken over the radio.
The term “say intentions” is a request for the pilot to advise the controller
of his or her intentions after a maneuver is performed:
CONTROLLER: Sport zero two romeo, say intentions after this touch and go.
PILOT:
Sport zero two romeo would like to depart to the east.

When only one pilot is flying an aircraft, it is particularly helpful to the pilot
to be given advance notice concerning instructions that might be received in
a later clearance. Such instructions are preceded by the word “expect.” This
information is used by the pilot for planning purposes in case of radio communication failure. Here are some examples:
Jetstream seven bravo charlie cleared to the Danville Airport via victor two
fifty-one. Climb and maintain six thousand. Expect the ILS runway one seven
approach at Danville.
Westwind six bravo victor, descend and maintain one zero thousand, expect
lower altitude in five miles.

218 / CHAPTER 4
A variety of other standardized phrases and abbreviations are used by air traffic
controllers while performing their duties. Some of the more common abbreviations are included in Table 4–3. Other phrases and abbreviations used by
controllers can be found either in FAAH 7110.65 or in the facility directives.
If all the communications procedures described in this chapter are used
by both air traffic controllers and pilots, the risk of miscommunication and the
resulting potential for an accident or incident can be significantly reduced. In
light of this fact, air traffic controllers should routinely use standard communications techniques when conversing with pilots and other controllers, resisting
the urge to use slang or CB radio language.

Table 4–3.

Some Standard ATC Abbreviations
Abbreviation

Meaning

A

Cleared to airport of intended landing

B

ARTCC clearance delivered

BC

ILS back course approach

CAF

Cleared as filed

CT

Contact approach

D

Cleared to depart from the fix

F

Cleared to the fix

FA

Final approach

I

Initial approach

ILS

ILS approach

L

Cleared to land

MA

Missed approach

MLS

MLS approach

N

Clearance not delivered

NDB

NDB approach

O

Cleared to the outer marker

OTP

VFR on top conditions

PA

Precision approach

PD

Pilot’s discretion

PT

Procedure turn

Q

Cleared to fly specified sectors of a navaid

RH

Runway heading

Airport Air Trafﬁc Control Communications
Table 4–3.

Some Standard ATC Abbreviations (continued)
Abbreviation

Meaning

RP

Report passing

RX

Report crossing

SA

Surveillance approach

SI

Straight-in approach

T

Cleared through an intermediate point

TA

TACAN approach

TL

Turn left

TR

Turn right

V

Cleared over the fix

VA

Visual approach

VR

VOR approach

X

Cleared to cross

Z

Tower jurisdiction

KEY TERMS
cleared (C)
cleared as filed (CAF)
coordinated universal time (UTC)
cruise clearance
direct
duplex communications
expect further clearance (EFC)
Federal Communications
Commission (FCC)

Greenwich mean time (GMT)
group form
holding pattern
intercept
knots
maintain
maintain VFR
millibars
pilot’s discretion

prime meridian
report crossing (RX)
report leaving (RL)
report reaching (RR)
simplex communications
TELCO
VFR on top
voice switching system

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. How is an air traffic control clearance issued?
2. How is each letter of the alphabet and each number phonetically pronounced in
aviation?
3. How are runways, airports, and airways identified?
4. How is time referenced in aviation?
5. What is a holding pattern and how is it used?

/

219

5
Air Trafﬁc Control Procedures
and Organization
Checkpoints
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
1. State the general responsibilities of an air route trafﬁc control center, an air
trafﬁc control tower, and a terminal radar approach control facility.
2. Describe the function of a letter of agreement.
3. Describe the function of a facility directive.
4. Explain what is meant by “transfer of communication.”
5. Explain what is meant by “transfer of control.”
6. Explain a handoff.
7. Identify the responsibilities of a controller in an ARTCC.
8. Identify the responsibilities of a controller in a control tower.

Air Traffic Control Procedures and Organization

/

221

Separation Responsibilities
in Controlled Airspace

Michael Nolan

The Federal Aviation Administration is designated, by act of Congress, as the
federal agency with authority for the separation of both civilian and military
aircraft within the controlled airspace overlying the United States. To carry out
this function, the FAA has divided the nation’s assigned airspace into twentyfour areas and assigned aircraft separation responsibility within these areas
to twenty-four air route traffic control centers (ARTCCs) (see Figure 5–1).
Personnel at each ARTCC have the ultimate responsibility for separating every
IFR and participating VFR aircraft operating within controlled airspace. Nonparticipating aircraft or aircraft operating in uncontrolled airspace are not
offered separation services.
The basic function of the ARTCC is to separate aircraft traveling between
airports. When a particular airport is congested and an FAA or military ATC
facility is located at or near the airport, it is usually more efficient for the local
ATC facility to be given responsibility for separating the aircraft operating in
the immediate vicinity of the airport. If, after performing a study of the local
airspace and traffic structure, the FAA determines that both safety and efficiency would be increased if the smaller facility were assigned responsibility for

Figure 5–1. The Indianapolis ARTCC, typical of most ARTCC facilities.

Michael Nolan

222 / CHAPTER 5

Figure 5–2. Indianapolis air traffic control tower.

the airspace, the ARTCC usually delegates aircraft separation responsibility to
that facility. If it is an FAA facility, it is usually either an air traffic control tower
(ATCT) (see Figure 5–2) or a terminal radar approach control (TRACON). If
it is a military facility, it is usually a control tower or a radar approach control
(RAPCON).
This transfer of separation responsibility from the ARTCC to the smaller
facility is formally authorized through a letter of agreement (LOA). Such a letter between air traffic control facilities specifically declares:
The physical dimensions of the airspace involved.
The approved altitudes and airways used by aircraft that will cross the
boundary between the two facilities.
The procedures used by air traffic controllers when an aircraft progresses from
one facility’s area of responsibility into the next.
Letters of agreement are also established between adjacent ARTCCs and control
towers that describe the boundaries of each facility’s area of responsibility
and the procedures that should be used when aircraft cross this boundary (see
Figure 5–3).

Air Traffic Control Procedures and Organization

/

223

FORT WORTH ARTCC AND HOUSTON ARTCC
LETTER OF AGREEMENT
Effective as of 7/6/02
PURPOSE:

This agreement between Fort Worth Air Route Traffic Control
Center (ZFW) and Houston Air Route Traffic Control Center
(ZHU) covers coordination procedures and is supplementary
to the procedures in the FAA Order 7110.65.

CANCELLATION: Any and all previous LOAs between ZFW and ZHU are canceled.
PROCEDURES:
Houston shall ensure that:
— Aircraft landing in the Dallas/Fort Worth terminal area and departing
from the Houston terminal area and east portion of Houston ARTCC are
cleared to Cedar Creek VORTAC (CQY) and cross the ARTCC boundary at or
below FL 270.
— Aircraft landing in the Dallas/Fort Worth terminal area and departing
from the Austin terminal area and west portion of Houston ARTCC are
cleared to Glen Rose VORTAC (CQY) and cross the ARTCC boundary at or
below FL 230.
Fort Worth shall ensure that:
— Aircraft landing in the Houston terminal area and departing from the
Dallas/Fort Worth terminal area are cleared to Navasota VORTAC (TNV)
and cross the ARTCC boundary at or below FL 270.
— Aircraft landing in the Austin terminal area and departing from the
Dallas/Fort Worth terminal area are cleared to Centex VORTAC (CWK) and
cross the ARTCC boundary at or below FL 190, descending to 11,000 ft.
EXCEPTIONS:

Deviations from the procedures established above may be
made only after prior coordination and agreement between
the parties involved.

Signed,
Houston ARTCC Chief
Fort Worth ARTCC Chief

Figure 5–3. Letter of agreement.

224 / CHAPTER 5

Air Trafﬁc Control Procedures
When separating aircraft, or when offering any additional ATC services, controllers must use the procedures found in the Air Traffic Control Handbook.
This FAA handbook was based on guidelines published by the International
Civil Aviation Organization (also known as ICAO annexes) but differs from
them in some minor areas. FAA-certified air traffic controllers, whether working for the FAA or for another employer, are obligated by law to use the handbook procedures whenever they are performing air traffic control duties.
Department of Defense (DOD) air traffic controllers use their own procedures, which differ somewhat from those used by FAA-certified controllers.
In general, military air traffic control procedures are modeled after those contained in the FAA handbook but in some cases permit either the pilot or the
controller less flexibility. Since some FAA controllers are assigned to military
facilities and some DOD controllers separate civilian aircraft, the handbook
contains both the FAA and military ATC procedures. The specific military procedures are described only if they differ from FAA-approved procedures.
To eliminate confusion about which set of procedures to apply when
separating aircraft, the FAA and the DOD have mutually agreed that:
If an FAA facility has the responsibility for providing aircraft separation at a
civilian airport, FAA separation procedures shall be applied to both civilian and
military aircraft operating within the FAA facility’s assigned airspace.
When a military ATC facility has been delegated the responsibility for providing
aircraft separation at a military airport, military separation standards shall be
applied to both military and civilian aircraft operating within the military ATC
facility’s assigned airspace.
When an FAA air traffic control facility is located at and is supporting a military
base exclusively, the FAA controllers will apply military separation rules to all
the aircraft within the FAA facility’s assigned airspace.
When an FAA facility is serving both a military base and a civilian airport,
military air traffic control procedures will be applied to DOD aircraft whereas
FAA procedures will be applied to all civilian aircraft operating within the FAA
facility’s assigned airspace.

Military Use
of Civilian
Airspace

The armed forces of the United States periodically conduct training exercises
that cannot be accomplished within the confines of restricted and military operation areas. These training exercises, including air intercept and midair refueling training, may require that reduced aircraft separation be applied, which
could pose a hazard to civilian aircraft. Procedures have been developed by the
DOD and the FAA to permit these exercises to be conducted while still maintaining safe separation between military and nonparticipating civilian aircraft.
When such exercises need to be performed, the DOD forwards a request to the
FAA to designate and reserve a specific block of airspace where the military
authority assumes responsibility for separation of aircraft (MARSA).

Air Traffic Control Procedures and Organization

/

225

Wherever MARSA airspace has been approved by the FAA, the appropriate military authority assumes total responsibility for the separation of every
military aircraft operating within its boundaries. FAA controllers are notified
of the MARSA reservation and are responsible for rerouting civilian IFR aircraft around the reserved airspace. VFR aircraft are permitted to operate within
MARSA airspace as long as the basic VFR weather conditions exist and can be
maintained. While operating within MARSA airspace, the VFR pilot is responsible for seeing and avoiding any participating military aircraft. VFR pilots will
be advised of the military operations if they are in contact with an ATC facility.
Whenever VFR conditions exist, it is also the military pilot’s responsibility to
see and avoid any civilian VFR aircraft operating in MARSA airspace.
Air Defense
Identiﬁcation
Zones

To protect national security, FAR 99 describes procedures to be used whenever
aircraft from a foreign country enter the airspace of the United States. FAR 99
defines six zones of airspace surrounding the United States known as air defense
identification zones (ADIZs) (see Figure 5–4). These zones are designed to facilitate the early identification and possible interception of any unidentified aircraft inbound to the United States. The six ADIZs are:
Atlantic Coastal ADIZ
Gulf of Mexico Coastal ADIZ
Southern Border Domestic ADIZ
Alaskan Distant Early Warning Identification Zone (DEWIZ)
Hawaiian Coastal ADIZ
Pacific Coastal ADIZ

Pilots penetrating an ADIZ are required to comply with the following regulations, or their aircraft may be considered as unidentified and they may find
themselves being intercepted by U.S. government aircraft:
A flight plan must have been filed with the FAA prior to departing from the
foreign country. This can be either an IFR or a defense visual flight rule (DVFR)
flight plan. A DVFR flight plan is a modified VFR flight plan designed for air
defense use exclusively. DVFR flight plans require pilots to specifically describe
the exact location and time when their aircraft will penetrate the ADIZ.
Any aircraft penetrating an ADIZ must be equipped with a two-way
communications radio operating on approved frequencies. This radio may
operate in the HF, VHF, or UHF band.
All IFR aircraft must follow normal position-reporting procedures. VFR aircraft
must report to the FAA prior to penetrating an ADIZ. (This report must be
made 15 to 60 minutes prior to entry, depending on the type of aircraft and its
location.)
VFR pilots must penetrate the ADIZ at the exact location and time specified in
the DVFR flight plan. Any error exceeding about 10 minutes or 20 miles from
what is stated on the flight plan will make the aircraft subject to interception by

226 / CHAPTER 5

Figure 5–4. An air defense identification zone as depicted on a sectional chart.

U.S. government aircraft. These aircraft may be affiliated with the Department
of Defense, U.S. Coast Guard, or U.S. Customs Service.

Any pilot who does not observe these procedures will likely be intercepted
and ordered to follow the intercepting aircraft to an airfield where a thorough
investigation of the pilot, passengers, and aircraft can be conducted. The pilots
could be charged with any number of legal violations, including violating the

Air Traffic Control Procedures and Organization

/

227

provisions of FAR 99. The air intercept procedures used by these aircraft are
described in the Aeronautical Information Manual.
There is no ADIZ along the borders of the United States and Canada.
Because the air defense of the North American continent is maintained jointly
by Canadian and American military forces, it is assumed that any unknown
aircraft that may have penetrated Canadian national airspace will be intercepted and identified by Canadian military authorities before it reaches the
U.S. border. U.S. Customs Service regulations still apply, however, to aircraft
flying from Canada to the United States. These regulations include the filing of
a flight plan, landing at an international airport, and inspecting the aircraft and
passengers by customs agents.
In response to the events of September 11, 2001, the FAA established
the Washington, D.C. Metropolitan Area Air Defense Identification Zone (DC
ADIZ). The purpose of this zone is similar to the previously mentioned ADIZs
but it is located entirely in domestic airspace. In general, the DC ADIZ is the
airspace located within a 30 nautical mile radius of Washington up to, but not
including FL 180.
Aircraft desiring to enter this airspace must:
• File a flight plan.
• Be equipped with a two-way radio and obtain an ATC clearance.
• Be equipped with an altitude reporting transponder.
• Monitor the emergency frequency of 121.5 mHz, if able.
• Squawk the assigned transponder code continuously.
• If VFR, operate at an indicated airspeed of 180 knots or less.

Typically, the only clearances issued in this airspace permit an aircraft to land
or depart at one of the small local airports. The ADIZ regulation expressly
prohibits the following operations:
• Flight Training
• Practice Instrument Approaches
• Aerobatic Flight
• Glider Operations
• Parachute Operations
• Ultralight Flights
• Hang Gliding
• Balloon Operations
• Agriculture/Crop Dusting
• Banner Towing Operations
• Model Aircraft Operations
• Model Rocketry
• Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS)

228 / CHAPTER 5
Foreign Air
Trafﬁc
Control
Services

A number of FAA facilities border air traffic control facilities operated by the
governments of neighboring countries. These include many of the ATC facilities
near the Canadian and Mexican borders. In addition, Alaskan, Hawaiian,
Puerto Rican, and Canal Zone facilities may also interact with ATC facilities
from other countries. Air route traffic control centers whose jurisdiction
includes oceanic flight also interact with foreign ATC facilities. In general,
unless otherwise agreed to, U.S. air traffic control’s responsibility ends at the
boundary between the two countries.
In some areas, particularly along the American Canadian border, operational requirements make it advantageous for the ATC service of one country
to control traffic within the sovereign airspace of the other country. In some
cases, FAA air traffic control facilities have been given responsibility for the
separation of aircraft operating within the other nation’s airspace, whereas in
other areas the foreign country may be authorized to control air traffic within
U.S. airspace. When control authority has been granted to the United States,
basic FAA air traffic control procedures are applied as long as they do not
unduly conflict with the procedures used by the other country. In particular,
in 1985 the United States and Canada signed an agreement recognizing the
essential safety of each country’s air traffic control procedures. The agreement
stipulates that each country may use its own ATC procedures even when separating aircraft that are within the other country’s airspace.
Since much of the world’s airspace lies over international waters, where
no nation has the legal right to control or restrict air traffic, ICAO member
nations have agreed to assign aircraft separation responsibility within international airspace to specific countries. These chosen countries are responsible for
providing air traffic control services using ICAO-approved procedures. ICAO
has assigned most of the Gulf of Mexico and about half of both the Atlantic
and the Pacific oceanic airspace to the FAA. Because the FAA does not legally
have the right to control flights within these areas, they are known as flight
information regions (FIRs). All ICAO member nations have agreed to comply
with the procedures used by the FAA when it provides ATC services within
these FIRs.

Privately
Operated
ATC Facilities

Because the FAA has limited resources for discharging its mission, it is unable
to construct and staff an ATC facility at every airport that wants one. The FAA
uses a standard formula, based on a number of factors, to determine whether
an ATC facility should be constructed or whether an existing facility should
remain in operation. These factors include:
The number of airline flights at the airport.
The number of airline passengers who use the airport.
The total number of flights into the airport.
The total number of IFR flights into the airport.
Any other factor that may warrant the construction of a facility, such as
intensive student training, proximity to a larger airport, and so on.

Air Traffic Control Procedures and Organization

/

229

Immediately after the PATCO strike of 1981, the FAA closed many lowactivity VFR towers which allowed the controllers of those towers to move to
larger facilities. In an effort to reopen the towers, the FAA initiated the Federal
Contract Tower (FCT) program which offered private contractors a subsidy
to operate them. Although operated by private contractors, controllers at
these towers must possess the same qualifications, follow the same rules, and
meet the same training and proficiency requirements as FAA-operated towers.
Additionally, pilots are required to conform to instructions issued by these
controllers just as if they were operated by the FAA.
There are some situations in which low-activity airports do not qualify
for FAA facilities, but the airport operator decides to construct and operate
their own air traffic control tower. The local airport operating authority may
choose to hire and train its own air traffic controllers or may contract out this
responsibility to a private air traffic control company. In either case, the control
tower personnel must be certified by the FAA and use the same procedures as
FAA controllers.
Non-FAA control towers are primarily concerned with separating VFR
traffic within the immediate vicinity of the airport and are seldom delegated
authority for IFR separation. This responsibility is usually assigned to a nearby
FAA or military ATC facility.

Delegation of Responsibility
As stated previously, the FAA has been given the responsibility of separating every aircraft participating in the nation’s air traffic control system. The
definition of participating aircraft is:
Any aircraft operating under an FAA clearance in controlled airspace, using IFR
flight rules.
VFR aircraft operating within areas of designated airspace where air traffic
control participation is mandatory (such as Class A, B, C, or D airspace).

The FAA has chosen to distribute this separation responsibility domestically to twenty-two air route traffic control centers in the United States (see
Figure 5–5a). These ARTCCs are located in the following cities:
Albuquerque ARTCC

Albuquerque, New Mexico

Anchorage ARTCC

Anchorage, Alaska

Atlanta ARTCC

Hampton, Georgia

Boston ARTCC

Nashua, New Hampshire

Chicago ARTCC

Aurora, Illinois

Cleveland ARTCC

Oberlin, Ohio

Denver ARTCC

Longmont, Colorado

Fort Worth ARTCC

Euless, Texas

230 / CHAPTER 5
Honolulu ARTCC

Honolulu, Hawaii

Houston ARTCC

Houston, Texas

Indianapolis ARTCC

Indianapolis, Indiana

Jacksonville ARTCC

Hilliard, Florida

Kansas City ARTCC

Olathe, Kansas

Los Angeles ARTCC

Palmdale, California

Memphis ARTCC

Memphis, Tennessee

Miami ARTCC

Miami, Florida

Minneapolis ARTCC

Farmington, Minnesota

New York ARTCC

Ronkonkoma, New York

Oakland ARTCC

Fremont, California

Salt Lake City ARTCC

Salt Lake City, Utah

Seattle ARTCC

Auburn, Washington

Washington ARTCC

Leesburg, Virginia

Because an individual controller cannot possibly separate all the aircraft
within a particular ARTCC’s boundaries, every center is divided into numerous smaller areas called sectors. Each of these sectors is fashioned in a logical
manner, taking into consideration the airway structure and traffic flows.
The process of sectorization is designed to make it easier for the controller
to separate all aircraft within the sector. Every ARTCC’s airspace is partitioned both vertically and horizontally into twenty to eighty sectors (see
Figure 5–5b). The sectors are usually stratified vertically into two or three
different levels. The vertical levels are then further partitioned into additional
horizontal sectors.
The airspace at most centers is usually stratified into at least two levels: a
low-altitude group of sectors extending from the Earth’s surface up to 18,000 feet
MSL, and a high-altitude group of sectors extending from 18,000 feet MSL
(FL 180) to 60,000 feet MSL (FL 600). Busier centers may stratify into three
levels, in which the low-altitude sectors extend from the ground to 18,000
feet MSL, the high-altitude sectors from FL 180 to FL 350, and the super-high
sectors from FL 360 to FL 600. This vertical stratification coincides with the
VOR airway structure. Aircraft operating on low-altitude victor airways are
always separated by low-altitude controllers, whereas aircraft operating on
high-altitude jet routes are separated by high-altitude controllers.
The physical dimensions of each sector within an ARTCC are specified
in the facility directives. Facility directives are similar to letters of agreement
but apply only to controllers working within a particular facility. Facility
directives specify the horizontal and vertical boundaries of each sector and
describe the procedures to be used when aircraft cross the boundary between
sectors.
Hand off
Procedures

When an aircraft crosses a sector boundary, the responsibility for separating
that aircraft passes on to the controller in the new sector. The original

Air Traffic Control Procedures and Organization

Figure 5-5(a). Air route traffic control center locations and boundaries.

Figure 5-5(b). Low-altitude ARTCC sectors.

/

231

232 / CHAPTER 5

Figure 5-6(a). High-altitude ARTCC sectors.

Figure 5-6(b). TRACON boundaries.

Air Traffic Control Procedures and Organization

/

233

controller is known as the transferring controller, whereas the next controller
is called the receiving controller. This transfer of separation responsibility is
known as the transfer of control. Typically, the pilot is directed to contact the
receiving controller on a different radio frequency prior to crossing the sector
boundary. This is known as the transfer of communication. The process of
transferring control and communication of an aircraft from one controller to
the next is known as a handoff (see Figure 5–7).
Handoffs are necessary when aircraft cross sector boundaries and when
an aircraft crosses the boundary between two separate ATC facilities, such
as between two centers or between a tower and a center. The FAA handbook
specifies that the transfer of communication must occur before the aircraft
crosses the sector boundary. This ensures that the receiving controller will be
in radio contact with the pilot before the aircraft enters his or her sector. This
permits the receiving controller to issue any new control instructions to the
pilot before the aircraft crosses the sector boundary.
Transfer of control does not occur until the aircraft actually crosses the
boundary; thus, the receiving controller does not have separation responsibility
or authority to change either the aircraft’s route of flight or altitude until the
aircraft crosses the sector boundary. The transferring controller must authorize
any changes to the aircraft’s route or altitude while it is still in his or her sector. Any clearance issued by the receiving controller cannot instruct the pilot to
alter the aircraft’s flight path or altitude until the aircraft crosses the boundary
or unless the transferring controller approves.

Aircraft in
communication with
sector B, under
control of sector A

Transfer of communications point
Sector
A

Aircraft in
communication with
sector B, under
control of sector B

Sector boundary

Aircraft in
communication with
sector A, under
control of sector A

Transfer of control point
Sector
B

Figure 5–7. Example of transfer of communications and transfer of control.

234 / CHAPTER 5
Preferential
Routes

The FAA has developed a system of preferential routes and altitudes for flight
between sectors. Some of these routes are published in the Airport Facility
Directory, whereas others are described in facility directives. The consistent use
of preferential routes and altitudes enhances traffic flows, thereby reducing the
controller’s workload. When more than one airway extends from one busy
airport to another, it is common practice to designate each as a one-way airway.
This procedure reduces the chance of a head-on collision at or near a sector
boundary.
If there are insufficient airways to designate one-way airways between
facilities, specific altitudes will usually be reserved for inbound aircraft, and
other available altitudes will be used by outbound aircraft. In most cases,
odd-numbered altitudes such as 3,000, 5,000, 7,000, and so on are assigned
to aircraft generally heading east, and even-numbered altitudes are assigned
to aircraft heading west. The letter of agreement between the two facilities is
specific about the procedures, altitudes, and airways to be used as aircraft cross
the facility boundaries. Facility directives are just as specific, defining the routes
and altitudes that should be used by aircraft crossing sector boundaries within
the facility (see Figure 5–8).

Approval
Requests and
Coordination

In some circumstances the controller may need to hand off an aircraft at a different altitude or on a different airway than specified in the letter of agreement.
The circumstances may be bad weather, local traffic conditions, or the pilot’s
request for a different route or altitude. In these cases, when the procedures
specified in the letter of agreement cannot be complied with, the two controllers
involved must effect coordination before the aircraft crosses the boundary. In
the coordination process, one controller asks for and receives permission from
the other controller to deviate from the terms of the letter of agreement. When
effecting coordination, the transferring controller contacts the receiving controller and requests approval for a route or altitude not specified in the letter of
agreement or facility directive. This type of request is known as an approval
request (APPREQ).
If the receiving controller determines that the approval request can be
accommodated without denigrating safety or delaying other traffic, approval
will normally be granted. Approval of an APPREQ is always left to the discretion of the receiving controller, since he or she will ultimately be responsible for
the separation of the aircraft once it enters his or her sector.
Approval requests are used whenever a controller wants to use a procedure that conflicts with those contained in letters of agreement or facility
directives. A controller can never be granted approval to deviate from the procedures contained in the FAA handbook, however. Application of the procedures included in the handbook is mandatory for controllers.
A typical approval request would be accomplished as follows:
TRANSFERRING CONTROLLER: APPREQ Rummy five niner at 7,000 over Pines.
RECEIVING CONTROLLER:
Rummy five niner at Pines at 7,000 approved.

Air Traffic Control Procedures and Organization

Departure
Airport

Preferred Route

235

Destination
Airport

ATL

ATL V97 NELLO V311 HCH V51 CGT V7 BEBEE ORD

ORD

ATL

ATL EAONE AHN J208 HPW J191 PXT KORRY-STAR LGA

LGA

ATL

ATL WETWO VUZ J41 MEM RZC PER GCK J154 RYLIE DANDDSTAR DEN

DEN

BOS

BOS MHT CAM J547 SYR J547 BUF J94 ECK J38 GRB J106 GEP J70
ABR J32 MLD J158 MVA MODESTO-STAR SFO

SFO

BOS

BOS LUCOS SEY067 SEY HTO J174 ORF J121 CHS J79 OMN
ANNEY-STAR MIA

MIA

BOS

BOS BOSOX V419 V14 ORW V16 DPK JFK

JFK

BWI

BWI V93 PXT V213 COLIN HCM J193 J121 CHS J79 OMN ANNEYSTAR MIA

MIA

CHI

CHI EON DNV VHP299 VHP J24 HVQ BKW ROA SOUTH_BOSTONSTAR RDU

RDU

CHI

CHI PLL PLL275/065 FOD J94 ONL J114 SNY LANDR-STAR DEN

DEN

CVG

CVG HYK VXV J99 IRQ J85 GNV GULLO_RNAV-STAR PBI

PBI

CVG

CVG HYK VXV J99 IRQ J85 AMG LEESE-STAR ORL

ORL

DCA

DCA BUFFR J518 DJB J34 BAE EAU_CLAIRE-STAR MSP

MSP

DCA

DCA PALEO V312 GOLDA V268 ENO V16 JFK V229 HFD V3
WOONS BOS

BOS

DEN

DEN ICT RZC VUZ MGM SZW J41 CYPRESS-STAR MIA

MIA

DFW

DFW SQS J52 ATL AHN J208 HPW J191 PXT KORRY-STAR LGA

LGA

DTW

DTW WINGS V103 ACO ACO145 J518 J152 JST BUNTS-STAR PHL

PHL

DTW

DTW ANNTS DXO217 FWA071 FWA MIE V14 CLANG-STAR IND

IND

EWR

EWR COATE J36 ULW141 ULW V36 YYZ

YYZ

EWR

EWR WHITE J209 SBY J79 KATZN J193 J121 CHS J79 OMN BITHOSTAR MCO

MCO

HOU

HOU BTR SJI J37 MGM MGM048/138 GRD J209 RDU J207 FKN J79
JFK NORWICH-STAR BOS

BOS

HPN

HPN WHITE J209 SBY J79 KATZN J193 J121 CHS J79 OMN BITHOSTAR MCO

MCO

IAD

IAD DAILY J61 HUBBS KEMPR WETRO DIW AR19 AYBID MIMMI
NEUBE SWOMP SANZZ CASKI PBI

PBI

IND

IND V275 KLINE VWV VWV051 POOFE DET

DET

JFK

JFK GAYEL J95 BUF J16 ECK J38 GRB J106 GEP J70 ABR J32 FMG
ILA PYE SFO

SFO

JFK

JFK RBV J230 AIR J80 EMPTY DQN CLANG-STAR IND

IND

LAS

LAS BCE MTU OCS J94 ONL J94 DBQ JVL JANESVILLE-STAR ORD

ORD

Figure 5–8. Preferred routes. (continues)

/

236 / CHAPTER 5
Departure
Airport

Preferred Route

Destination
Airport

LAX

LAX SEAL_BEACH-DP SLI SLI148 V25 V165 SARGS SAN

SAN

LAX

LAX DAG J100 OBK J584 CRL J554 JHW J70 LVZ LENDY-STAR JFK

JFK

LGA

LGA ELIOT J80 AIR J110 STL J19 ZUN FOSSL-STAR PHX

PHX

MCO

MCO MCCOY-DP SAV J55 CHS J121 SWL SWL034 RADDS CEDAR_
LAKE-STAR PHL

PHL

MKC

MKC LAKES-DP COU STL J24 VHP J80 J30 BUCKO BUCKO-STAR
DCA

DCA

MSP

MSP ODI J30 BRIBE BDF ENL ENL162 PLESS J45 ATL J89 OTK
LEESE-STAR ORL

ORL

ORD

ORD MUSKY V100 ELX V218 LAN SPRTN-STAR DET

DET

PHL

PHL PTW PTW320 V499 V164 FQM V31 ULW V36 YYZ

YYZ

PHX

PHX GUP J102 ALS PUB GLD J146 GIJ J554 JHW J70 LVZ LENDYSTAR JFK

JFK

PIT

PIT EWC EWC050 J584 SLT J190 ALB GDM GARDNER-STAR BOS

BOS

RDU

RDU PACKK-DP AZELL HVQ J24 VHP OKK KOKOMO-STAR ORD

ORD

SAN

SAN DVC J197 GLD J192 IOW J146 J34 DJB V30 ACO V337 CUTTA
PIT

PIT

STL

STL J110 GCK J154 RYLIE DANDD-STAR DEN

DEN

In this example, the transferring controller has requested that Air Force
Rummy five niner be permitted to enter the receiving controller’s airspace at
the Pines intersection at an altitude of 7,000 feet. This is apparently either the
wrong altitude or a route of flight different from that specified in the letter of
agreement between the two facilities. The receiving controller has determined
that safety will not be compromised if Air Force Rummy five niner enters the
sector at this route and altitude and has granted approval. The transferring
controller must then advise the pilot to contact the receiving controller before
the aircraft crosses the sector boundary.
The basic rule of air traffic control separation is that every controller
is responsible for the separation of participating aircraft for the duration of
time the aircraft is within the controller’s sector of responsibility. Controllers
are never permitted to change the route or altitude of an aircraft while it is
in another controller’s area without the express permission of that controller.
Conversely, a controller must always transfer both control and communication
before an aircraft crosses the boundary into the receiving controller’s airspace,
unless approval has been granted by the receiving controller.

Air Traffic Control Procedures and Organization

/

237

Controller Duties in an Air Route
Trafﬁc Control Center
Flight Data
Controllers

Every sector within an ARTCC usually has one to three controllers assigned to
separate the aircraft within that sector. The first position that most controllers
in an ARTCC are assigned to is the role of flight data controller. The flight data
controller is responsible for assisting the other controllers, who actually separate the aircraft. The flight data controller effects coordination with other controllers and passes along pertinent flight information to controllers working in
other sectors.

Radar
Controllers

Every ARTCC sector equipped with radar is staffed by a controller whose
responsibility is to separate participating aircraft using a radar-derived display.
Radar controllers issue altitude, heading, or airspeed changes to keep the aircraft separated and in compliance with the various letters of agreement and
facility directives that may apply to that sector.

Radar
Associate/
Nonradar
Controller

Every sector within the center is also staffed by a radar associate/nonradar
controller whose duties are to assist the radar controller when separating aircraft that do not appear on the radar display. The nonradar controller’s duties
include updating the flight progress strips to accurately reflect every aircraft’s
position, altitude, and route of flight. The nonradar controller uses this information to separate aircraft that are either too low or too far away to be displayed on the radar. The nonradar controller must be prepared to assume
aircraft separation responsibility if the radar display should malfunction. The
nonradar controller’s duties are similar to those performed by the B controller
in the old air traffic control centers.

Air Trafﬁc Control Tower
Responsibilities
When it is operationally advantageous for an ARTCC to delegate separation
responsibility to an air traffic control tower (ATCT), an appropriate letter of
agreement is drafted by representatives of both the tower and the center. This
letter of agreement delineates the control tower’s area of responsibility and
formally transfers the responsibility for aircraft separation to the tower. In most
cases, the control tower is delegated the responsibility for separation of participating aircraft operating within about a 40-mile radius of the airport. This
airspace usually extends from the Earth’s surface up to an altitude of 6,000 to
10,000 feet MSL.
The letter of agreement between the tower and the center also specifies
how and where the transfer of control and communication will occur. If the
tower’s delegated airspace is adjacent to that of another tower or a different

238 / CHAPTER 5
center, a letter of agreement is also drafted by representatives from each of these
facilities, describing the procedures to be used when handing off aircraft as they
cross the facility boundaries.
Since the control tower’s designated airspace is usually too large or complex for one controller to safely handle, it is usually divided into smaller sectors, with individual controllers responsible for aircraft separation within each
sector. The facility manager, after consulting with the controllers, drafts and
distributes a facility directive that defines the operating rules and procedures
controllers should use when separating aircraft within the control tower’s delegated airspace.
Most control towers have at least three and as many as ten operating
positions where controllers might work. Every position has standardized duties
and functions, which are described in the remainder of this chapter. Keep in
mind, however, that each air traffic facility has its own unique requirements
that might modify the generic job responsibilities described here.
Ground
Control

The ground controller works in the glass-enclosed portion of the tower known
as the tower cab and is responsible for the separation of aircraft and vehicles
operating on the ramp, taxiways, and any inactive runways. This responsibility
includes aircraft taxiing out for takeoff, aircraft taxiing into the terminal building after landing, and any ground vehicles operating on airport movement
areas. Airport movement areas do not include those areas solely reserved for
vehicular traffic such as service roads or boarding areas.
The ground controller is assigned a unique radio frequency to communicate with pilots and vehicle operators. The most common ground control
frequency is 121.90 mHz. In congested areas where two or more control towers
are located near each other, ground controller transmissions from each airport
might overlap, causing pilot misinterpretation. Thus, in such cases each control
tower is assigned a different frequency for its ground controllers. These additional frequencies are usually 121.80 or 121.70 mHz.
The duties of the ground controller include:
Providing instructions to taxiing aircraft and ground support vehicles.
Controlling taxiway lighting systems.
Issuing clearances to IFR and participating VFR aircraft.
Coordinating with the local controller when taxiing aircraft need to operate on
active runways.
Issuing weather and NOTAM information to taxiing aircraft.
Receiving and relaying IFR departure clearances.
Relaying runway and taxiway condition information to airport management.

At less busy air traffic control towers, the ground controller may also be
responsible for coordinating with other facilities and issuing ATC clearances to
aircraft prior to departure. At busier control towers, these tasks are assigned to
a clearance delivery controller, who is assigned a frequency separate from that

Air Traffic Control Procedures and Organization

/

239

used by the ground controller. At very busy locations, a flight data controller
may also be on duty to assist the ground controller when coordinating with
other controllers.
Local Control

The local controller is primarily responsible for the separation of aircraft operating within the airport traffic area and those landing on any of the active
runways. The local controller is assigned a unique radio frequency that permits
communication with these aircraft. The primary responsibility of the local controller is arranging inbound aircraft into a smooth and orderly flow of traffic
and sequencing departing aircraft into this flow. The local controller’s responsibilities are complicated by the fact that most of the airports in this country do
not have sufficient nonintersecting runways to handle the number of aircraft
that want to land or take off. Thus, the local controller may be forced to use
two or three runways that intersect each other.
At very busy facilities, the local controller’s workload may be too much
for one person to handle. In such cases, the local control position is split into
two, with each controller responsible for different runways and assigned separate radio frequencies. Duties performed by the local controller include:
Determining the active runway.
Issuing landing and takeoff clearances.
Issuing landing information.
Sequencing landing aircraft.
Coordinating with other controllers.
Issuing weather and NOTAM information to pilots.
Operating the runway and approach light systems.

Approach
and
Departure
Control

At busy facilities that have been delegated a large amount of airspace from the
ARTCC, an approach and departure control position is usually designated.
This position is commonly referred to simply as the approach control position.
At smaller, less busy towers, approach control may be the responsibility of one
controller stationed in the tower cab itself, but at larger and busier airports
equipped with radar, the approach control may be housed in a separate building located near the tower. This facility is known throughout the FAA as a
terminal radar approach control (TRACON). The TRACON may be equipped
with up to twenty radar displays and may be staffed by up to forty controllers
at a time. At most facilities, TRACON controllers may also occasionally work
in the tower cab, but at some of the larger TRACONs they are assigned strictly
to the approach control facility. The airspace controlled by a TRACON is usually too large to be administered by one controller and is divided into smaller,
more manageable sectors. The physical dimensions of each sector and the procedures controllers use as aircraft pass from one sector to another are delineated in the appropriate facility directives.

240 / CHAPTER 5

KEY TERMS
air defense identification zone
(ADIZ)
air traffic control tower (ATCT)
airport movement areas
approach and departure control
approval request (APPREQ)
clearance delivery controller
coordination
defense visual flight rules (DVFR)
facility directives
flight data controller

flight information regions (FIRs)
ground controller
handoff
letter of agreement (LOA)
local controller
military assumes responsibility
for separation of aircraft
(MARSA)
preferential routes
radar approach control
(RAPCON)

radar associate/nonradar
controller
radar controllers
receiving controller
sectors
terminal radar approach control
(TRACON)
tower cab
transfer of communication
transfer of control
transferring controller

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. What procedure is used to distribute air traffic control separation responsibility to
different ATC facilities around the United States?
2. How do military and civilian ATC facilities coordinate amongst themselves?
3. How do air traffic control facilities coordinate separation?
4. What are the operational positions within an air route traffic control center?
5. What are the operational positions within an air traffic control tower?

6
Control Tower Procedures
Checkpoints
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Explain how a controller obtains and amends information from the ﬂight data
processing (FDP) system.
2. Explain the purpose and operation of the Automatic Terminal Information
Service (ATIS).
3. State the duties of a controller in a control tower.
4. Deﬁne runway incursions and explain why they should be prevented.
5. Explain how the local controller separates aircraft in the trafﬁc pattern.
6. State the runway separation minima for landing and departing aircraft.
7. Explain wake turbulence and the rules concerning its avoidance.
8. Explain the usage, requirements, and limitations of land and hold short
operations (LAHSO).

242 / CHAPTER 6

Control Towers
Air traffic control towers are operated by both the FAA and non-federal agencies to provide separation to aircraft using an airport. The primary responsibility of the control tower is to ensure that sufficient runway separation exists
between aircraft landing and departing. Other responsibilities of the control
tower include relaying IFR clearances, providing taxi instructions, and assisting
airborne aircraft within the immediate vicinity of the airport. These tasks are
accomplished using two-way radio equipment to instruct the pilot to land or
take-off or to adjust the aircraft’s flight pattern.
There are three general categories of control towers: VFR towers, nonradar-approach control towers, and radar-approach control towers. Both
radar- and nonradar-approach control towers have been delegated IFR separation responsibility by a letter of agreement between the control tower and the
ARTCC. Nonradar-approach controllers are usually located in the tower cab
itself and separate IFR aircraft using the nonradar procedures described in detail
in Chapter 7. Radar-approach controllers are usually housed in a separate room
near the base of the tower. These controllers separate IFR aircraft using radar
and the procedures described in Chapter 8. VFR towers are not delegated any
significant separation responsibility by the ARTCC. Primary responsibility for
IFR separation around VFR towers is retained by the ARTCC or has been delegated to another control tower. Controllers in a VFR tower may be delegated
limited responsibility for initially separating IFR departures or separating IFR
arrivals from IFR departures. These procedures are covered in Chapter 7.
All three types of control towers are responsible for the separation of aircraft taking off or landing at the airport. Only the procedures and techniques
used by controllers to separate aircraft operating within the airport traffic area
or on the airport surface are discussed in this chapter.
The duties of personnel assigned to a control tower have been subdivided
into four categories: flight data, clearance delivery, ground control, and local
control. In a busy tower, these responsibilities may be assigned to four or more
individual controllers, whereas at less busy facilities these responsibilities may
be combined into fewer positions.

Flight Data Controller Duties
The flight data controller assists the other controllers in the tower and performs
the clerical duties inherent in the operation of any facility. As noted in Chapter 5,
this position is typically the first one assigned to a new controller at the facility.
The basic responsibilities of and duties performed by a flight data controller include the following:
Receiving and relaying IFR departure clearances to the clearance delivery
controller

Control Tower Procedures

/

243

Operating the flight data processing equipment
Relaying weather and NOTAM information to other positions of operation
Aiding other tower controllers by relaying any directed information
Collecting, tabulating, and storing daily records
Preparing the Automatic Terminal Information Service (ATIS) recordings
Processing field condition reports

Receiving
and Relaying
IFR Departure
Clearances

The flight data controller is responsible for obtaining IFR clearances from the
ARTCC and relaying them to the clearance delivery controller. These clearances are received over the telephone or through automated procedures. IFR
clearances obtained by telephone are handwritten, whereas those obtained
automatically are printed mechanically on a flight data input/output (FDIO)
device.
Clearances are printed in a standard format on forms known as flight
progress strips (or flight strips), as shown in Figure 6–1. After obtaining the
IFR clearance, the flight data controller passes the strip to the clearance delivery
controller. To facilitate accurate interpretation, flight strips are printed using
standard markings and abbreviations, ensuring that specific information will
always be found in the same place. These locations of flight strips are known as
fields. The approved field contents and format can be found in the Air Traffic
Control Handbook.
Flight progress strips used in control towers are formatted differently
from those used in the ARTCCs but contain essentially the same information.
A sample flight progress strip used in a control tower is shown in Figure 6–2
with the appropriate field numbers notated.
The format for flight strips differs somewhat depending on whether the
aircraft involved is a departure, an arrival, or an over flight (an aircraft that

+

+

SV

Figure 6–1. Sample terminal flight progress strip.

1
2
3
4

2A

5

8

6

8A

7

8B

9

9A

Figure 6–2. Fields on a terminal flight progress strip.

9B 10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

9C

244 / CHAPTER 6
passes through the airspace delegated to the tower but is not planning to land).
Since the flight data controller in the tower will primarily be concerned with
departing aircraft, that type of flight strip is discussed here.
A flight progress strip for a departing aircraft includes the following
information, by field number:
1. Aircraft identification. The aircraft identification consists of the approved
identification as discussed in Chapter 4.
2. Revision number (FDIO strip only). When the first flight progress strip has been
printed for this aircraft, a number 1 appears in this location. If the pilot’s flight plan
is changed, or if the ARTCC amends the pilot’s clearance, a new flight strip is printed
with a number 2 in the field. The old strip should be destroyed. If by some chance it
is not destroyed, the revision number will help establish which strip contains the most
current flight plan information.
2A. Strip request originator. At FDIO-equipped locations, this indicates the sector or
position that requested the strip.
3. Type of aircraft. The type of aircraft is indicated using the conventions covered
in Chapter 4. If more than one aircraft is included in the clearance, the number of
aircraft involved precedes the aircraft type, separated by a slash (multiple aircraft
flying under the same IFR clearance are known as a flight). If the aircraft’s gross
weight is over 255,000 pounds, it is considered a heavy aircraft and usually creates
a phenomenon known as wake turbulence. This turbulence, which can be dangerous
to following aircraft, is discussed later in this chapter. A heavy aircraft is identified
with an H preceding the aircraft type on the flight strip. Examples of aircraft types
include the following:
2/F16

Two F16 fighters

H/B747

A heavy Boeing 747

To assist subsequent controllers, an equipment suffix is added to the aircraft
type. The type of equipment onboard the aircraft is determined using the information provided by the pilot upon filing the IFR flight plan. The equipment
suffix printed on the flight strip will usually be one of the following:

No
transponder

Transponder
without
altitude
encoding

Transponder
with altitude
encoding

No DME

/X

/T

/U

DME

/D

/B

/A

TACAN Only

/M

/N

Flight Management
Systems (FMS)

/P
/E

GPS/GNSS

/G

Required Navigation
Performance (RNP)

/R

Control Tower Procedures

No
transponder

Transponder
without
altitude
encoding

/

245

Transponder
with altitude
encoding

Reduced Vertical
Separation Minima
(RVSM)

/W

RNP and RVSM aircraft

/Q

4. Computer identification number (FDIO only). If the flight progress strip has
been computer generated and printed, a unique computer identification number will
be printed in this field. This number is unique to the aircraft and can be used in place
of the aircraft identification number when using FDIO equipment to obtain additional
information about the aircraft.
5. Assigned transponder code. The computer located in the ARTCC will assign
a transponder code to this flight. The transponder code is allocated automatically
according to the National Beacon Code Allocation Plan (NBCAP). Since two aircraft
cannot be assigned the same transponder code while within the boundaries of the
same ARTCC, the NBCAP computer program attempts to assign each aircraft a
transponder code that will not be the same as that assigned to another aircraft.
The NBCAP plan reserves some codes that cannot be assigned to IFR flights. These
transponder codes include the following:
1200

Reserved for VFR aircraft not in contact with an ATC facility.

7500

Reserved for aircraft being hijacked.

7600

Reserved for aircraft experiencing radio communications failure.

7700

Reserved for aircraft experiencing some type of emergency.

6. Proposed departure time. This is the proposed UTC departure time that the pilot
filed in the original flight plan.
7. Requested altitude. This is the altitude requested in the pilot’s original flight
plan. To conserve space on the flight progress strip, the last two zeros in the altitude
are dropped. For example:
Printed altitude

Actual altitude

50

5,000 feet

100

10,000 feet

240

Flight level 240 (24,000 feet)

8. Departure airport. This is the airport from which the aircraft will depart. It is printed
as a three-character identifier. Every airport that has a published instrument approach has
been issued an identifier. Some of the more common identifiers include the following:
ORD

O’Hare International, Chicago, Illinois

JFK

John F. Kennedy International, New York

ATL

Hartsfield International, Atlanta, Georgia

246 / CHAPTER 6
A more complete list is included in Appendix C.
8A and 8B. Optional use.
9. Route of flight and destination airport. The clearance limit is either the
destination airport or an intermediate en route fix. The route to be flown includes any
airways or VORs that the pilot will be using. If the route is to be flown using area
navigation (RNAV), either the waypoint names or their latitude-longitude coordinates
will be included. If no airway is designated between two VORs, it is assumed that the
pilot will fly directly from one VOR to the next.
This field may also include any preferential routes that have been assigned by
the ARTCC computer. A preferential route may be a departure, an en route, or an
arrival route. Whenever the computer places a preferential route on the flight strip, it
should replace the route of flight filed by the pilot. Preferential routes can be identified
on the flight progress strip since they are bracketed with  symbols. This field may
also contain the abbreviation FRC, which stands for “full route clearance.” This
abbreviation is added to the flight plan whenever a controller has changed the pilot's
requested route of flight, without the knowledge of the pilot. This information will be
used by the clearance delivery controller.
9A, 9B, and 9C. Optional use.
10–18. These fields include any items that may be specified in the facility directives,
including actual departure time, departure runway, or any other pertinent information.
Standard symbols have been developed for use in these situations. These symbols may
be found in the FAA handbook. A sampling is provided in Table 6–1.

The flight data controller should check each flight progress strip to ensure that
all the appropriate information has been obtained. It is the flight data controller’s responsibility to obtain a corrected flight progress strip, if necessary.
Operating
the Flight
Data
Processing
Equipment

In 1961, when President John F. Kennedy created the Project Beacon task force,
controllers were still hand printing flight progress strips and passing along
flight information to other controllers using teletypes and party line telephone
equipment. A significant portion of a controller’s time was spent communicating with other controllers, requesting and passing along this essential flight
information. The Project Beacon task force recommended that the FAA develop
a computerized flight information system to automatically update and print out
flight progress strips. Such a system was developed and finally installed by IBM
in the early 1970s. By the mid-1980s this system had become outdated, and the
FAA replaced it with a new computer system called the flight data processing
(FDP) system.
The flight data processing system uses computers located at each of the
ARTCCs to store and update aircraft flight plan information. Whenever a pilot
files an IFR flight plan with any air traffic control facility, the information
contained in the flight plan is transmitted to and stored in the computer. A half
hour prior to the pilot’s proposed departure time, the computer assigns the
aircraft a transponder code and causes a flight progress strip to be printed on
an FDIO printer at the departure airport. At facilities not equipped with FDIO,
the flight progress strip is printed at the appropriate ARTCC sector, and the

Control Tower Procedures
Table 6–1.

/

247

Symbols Used in Flight Strip Fields
Symbol

TS

Meaning

Depart (direction, if specified)

c

Climb and maintain

T

Descend and maintain

S

Cruise

@

At



Cross

¡
M
–


Maintain
Join or intercept airway



While in controlled airspace


R

Q

Q
R 
nW 
ne
S
e

While in control area
Enter control area
Out of control area
Cleared to enter, depart, or pass through a control zone
(direction of flight is indicated by an arrow and the appropriate
compass letter)

250K

Assigned airspeed



Before



After or past

/
–T
–c

Until


cL

At or below
At or above
Clearance void time
Pilot cancelled flight plan

C

Contact (facility) on the appropriate frequency

RV

Radar vector

flight data controller in the tower must telephone the ARTCC and request the
appropriate flight information. This information must then be handwritten by
the flight data controller onto a flight progress strip.
Departure Message When the aircraft departs, the FDIO is used to send a
departure message to the computer at the center. A departure message may be
sent either manually or automatically.
To manually transmit a departure message, the flight data controller types
the departure aircraft’s identification and time of departure into the FDIO. This
information is then sent to the computer. The controller may use the aircraft’s
call sign, transponder code, or computer identification number to identify any

248 / CHAPTER 6
particular aircraft. The departure time is always entered as UTC time. If no
time is entered in the departure message, the current time is assumed by the
computer. A departure message is preceded by the characters “DM” when being
entered into the FDIO. For example:
DM UA611 0313

United Airlines Flight 611 departed at 0313 UTC.

DM 561

The aircraft assigned computer identification number
561 departing at current UTC time.

If the control tower is equipped with the automated radar terminal system
(ARTS) or STARS, the departure message will be automatically sent to the
ARTCC computer whenever the secondary radar receiver detects the transmission from the aircraft’s transponder (ARTS is discussed in detail in Chapter 8).
Upon receipt of the departure message, the ARTCC computer begins to automatically calculate the aircraft’s future position and prints a flight progress
strip for every controller who will eventually be responsible for separating
the aircraft. The computer transmits the flight progress strip to each sector
approximately 20 to 30 minutes before the aircraft is scheduled to enter that
sector.
Amending Flight Progress Strips Using FDIO The flight progress strip is
typically printed in the control tower 30 minutes before the pilot’s proposed
departure time. If, for any reason, the flight strip has not been printed when the
pilot is ready to depart, the flight data controller may be asked to obtain a flight
strip using the FDIO. This is accomplished through the use of a strip request
(SR) message. To request a flight strip through the FDIO, the controller must
type the letters SR followed by the aircraft’s call sign (for e.g., SR UA611).
If one of the fields on the flight strip contains incorrect information or if
the pilot requests a change to the flight plan, the flight data controller may be
asked to amend the strip to incorporate the new information. The controller
does so by using the FDIO to send an amendment (AM) message. The proper
procedure is to type the letters AM followed by the aircraft’s identification, the
number of the field that needs to be changed, and the new information for that
field. For example, AM UA611 7 120 changes the pilot’s requested altitude
(field 7) to 12,000 feet.
If the aircraft’s route of flight or altitude is amended, a new flight progress
strip is automatically sent to every subsequent sector. If the aircraft’s route of
flight will cause it to cross into another ARTCC’s area of responsibility, the
appropriate flight information is automatically transmitted to the computer
within that ARTCC. When the aircraft leaves the ARTCCs area or lands at the
arrival airport, the flight information is erased from the computer’s memory,
permitting that aircraft’s transponder code to be allocated to another aircraft.
Relaying
Weather and
NOTAM
Information

The flight data controller is required to acquire and disseminate appropriate
weather information to other controllers or to the National Weather Service
(NWS). If the NWS office is located at the airport, its personnel are usually
responsible for taking routine weather observations. The controllers in the

Control Tower Procedures

/

249

tower are required to make only tower visibility observations. If no NWS office
is located at the airport, the tower controllers are likely to be responsible for
performing all of the necessary weather observations, which they forward to
the nearest NWS facility.
The controllers in the tower are also responsible for soliciting pilot reports
(PIREPs) from pilots operating within the vicinity of the control tower. PIREPs
are an essential means of passing along actual flight conditions to other pilots
and the NWS. The flight data controller is also responsible for disseminating this weather information to pilots through the use of Automatic Terminal
Information Service (ATIS) equipment.
ATIS is a continuous-loop digital recording usually made by the flight
data controller and transmitted on a VHF frequency for pilot reception. ATIS
recordings inform both arriving and departing pilots of weather conditions and
other pertinent information at the airport. Pilot reception of ATIS information
relieves the ground or approach controller of repeating weather conditions and
non-control information to every aircraft. Recordings are made at least once
every hour but may be made more often if weather conditions change rapidly.
The following information should be included in an ATIS recording:
1. The name of the airport.
2. The ATIS phonetic alphabet code. Every ATIS recording is assigned a code
letter that identifies it. The code begins with the letter A and is incremented
as new ATIS recordings are made. When pilots make initial contact with a
controller, they advise that they have received “Information (code letter).”
Whenever a new ATIS recording is made, it is the flight data controller’s
responsibility to inform the other controllers in the facility of the new ATIS
code letter. Because pilots may listen to the ATIS 10 to 20 minutes prior to
contacting a controller, this procedure identifies whether the pilot has received
the latest ATIS information.
3. The UTC time of weather observation. This may not be the actual time that the
ATIS is recorded, as there is usually a delay between the weather observation
and the recording.
4. Wind direction and speed.
5. The visibility in miles and/or fractions of a mile.*
6. The cloud ceiling. The ceiling is measured in feet above the ground and is
either measured or estimated. Measured ceilings are determined using a
ceilometer.
7. The current temperature in degrees Celsius.
8. The current dew point temperature in degrees Celsius.
9. The altimeter setting.
10. The instrument approach procedure(s) currently in use.
11. The runways(s) used for arrivals.
12. The runway(s) used for departures.
*(Items 5 and 6 may be replaced by the phrase “better than five thousand and five”, if the ceiling is
higher than 5,000 feet and the visibility is greater than 5 miles.)

250 / CHAPTER 6
13. Pertinent NOTAMS or weather advisories. These include any taxiway
closures, severe weather advisories, navigation aid disruptions, unlit obstacles in the
vicinity of the airport, or any other problems that could affect the safety of flight.
14. Braking action reports (if appropriate).
15. Low-level wind-shear advisories (if appropriate).
16. Remarks or other information. This may include VFR arrival frequencies, radio
frequencies that have been temporarily changed, runway friction measurement
values, bird activity advisories, and part-time tower operation.
17. Some towers are required to include a statement advising the pilot to read back
instructions to hold short of a runway. The air traffic manager may elect to
remove this requirement provided that it does not result in increased requests
from aircraft for read back of hold short instructions.
18. Instructions for the pilot to advise the controller that the ATIS recording has
been received. A typical ATIS recording is taped in the following sequence:
Lansing Airport information charlie, one five five zero zulu weather, wind one
six zero at one zero, visibility five, light snow, measured ceiling six hundred
overcast. Temperature seven, dew point two, altimeter two niner five five. ILS
runway two eight left approach in use, landing and departing runways two
eight left and two eight right. Notice to airmen, taxiway bravo is closed. VFR
arrivals contact Lansing approach control on one two five point niner. Advise
the controller on initial contact that you have information charlie.

Clearance Delivery Controller Duties
The clearance delivery controller is responsible for obtaining and relaying
departure clearances to pilots. The clearance should include the following:
Aircraft identification
Clearance limit
Departure procedure
Route of flight
Altitude
Departure frequency
Transponder code

The clearance delivery controller is also responsible for amending clearances
as necessary. Aircraft clearances may need to be amended to conform to any
of the procedures spelled out in letters of agreement or facility directives. Typical amendments might include temporary altitude restrictions or temporary
changes in the aircraft’s route of flight.
Temporary altitude restrictions may be placed on a pilot to ease the
coordination required between the local and the departure controller. At most
radar-equipped facilities, the local controller has been delegated the responsibility for initially separating departing aircraft. To ensure that these departures

Control Tower Procedures

/

251

120∞

Departure area
30∞

30∞

5,000 ft.

5 n mi

Runway

Figure 6–3. Example of a local controller’s delegated departure area.

are properly separated from other aircraft within the approach controller’s
airspace, facility directives usually describe a specific area that may be used
only for departures. Arriving aircraft may not enter this airspace without
approval from the local controller. Every facility has its own unique requirements that affect the shape of this departure area, but it is usually an area 40°
to 180° wide, extending from the Earth’s surface up to about 5,000 feet AGL
(see Figure 6–3).
The facility directives usually state that the local controller may depart
aircraft into this area without prior coordination with the departure controller.
The departure controller must keep arriving aircraft out of this area unless the
local controller grants approval. This procedure automatically provides for initial separation of aircraft. Once an aircraft departs, the local controller advises
the pilot to contact the departure controller, who has the authority to amend
the aircraft's clearance as necessary.
It is the clearance delivery controller’s responsibility to temporarily amend
the pilot’s clearance to comply with these departure restrictions, which usually
consist of restricting the pilot’s altitude to the upper limit of the departure area.
To reassure the pilot that this restriction is temporary and that the requested
altitude will probably be granted at a later time, and to conform with the FARs,
the clearance delivery controller must advise the pilot to expect his or her final
altitude at some later time. This interval is specified in the facility directives and
is usually 5 or 10 minutes. For example, if a pilot requests a cruising altitude of
15,000 feet MSL but the upper limit of the departure area is 5,000 feet MSL,
the clearance delivery controller would advise the pilot to “maintain five thousand, expect one five thousand one zero minutes after departure.”
The clearance delivery controller must also ensure that the pilot’s route of
flight is accurate and conforms to any preferential routes that may have been
established. If the route must be changed, the controller must issue the new
route to the pilot and amend the route of flight using the FDIO equipment.

252 / CHAPTER 6

Ground Controller Duties
The ground controller is responsible for the safety of aircraft that are taxiing
on taxiways or inactive runways. The ground controller issues instructions to
aircraft taxiing to or from runways or to vehicles operating around the airport. The ground controller is permitted to exercise this control authority only
in areas where traffic can be observed and controlled. The controller is not
responsible for aircraft taxiing where they cannot be observed from the control
tower, such as aircraft parking areas, hangars, and terminal boarding. Aircraft
operating within these nonmovement areas cannot be offered any ground control services. Aircraft and vehicles operating within these areas may proceed
without contacting the ground controller.
To ensure that the ground controller is always communicating with the
correct pilot, the aircraft’s position must be positively determined before issuing any instructions. This position determination can be made through the use
of visual observation, a pilot report, or airport surface radar.
After determining the aircraft’s location, the ground controller should
issue positive instructions to the pilot. These instructions should include the
aircraft identification, the name of the ground controller’s facility, the route
to be used while taxiing, and any restrictions applicable to the pilot. Here are
some examples of phraseology:
United six eleven, Lafayette ground, taxi to runway one zero.
Cherokee two one four papa alpha, taxi to runway three five via taxiway bravo
and charlie.
American niner twenty-one, taxi to the terminal via the new scenic taxiway.

To avoid confusion when issuing taxi instructions to pilots, the ground controller should never use the word “cleared.” The only person who should use this
word is the clearance delivery controller when issuing a clearance or the local
controller when clearing aircraft for takeoff or landing. Because the fidelity
of aircraft communications equipment is low and the noise level in the tower
and cockpit is fairly high, it is possible for the pilot to misinterpret “Cleared
to taxi to runway three one” to mean “Cleared for takeoff runway three one.”
Obviously these are two very different clearances. However, if the weather
conditions are such that neither the ground nor the local controller can see the
aircraft, this misinterpretation might prove to be very dangerous.
Preventing
Runway
Incursions

One of the primary responsibilities of the ground controller is to ensure that
vehicles and taxiing aircraft remain clear of the active runways. If an aircraft
or vehicle must cross an active runway, the ground controller must receive permission for that operation from the local controller. If an aircraft should inadvertently taxi onto an active runway without the local controller’s knowledge,
an accident could result. Such accidental entry, known as a runway incursion,
should be avoided at all costs.

Control Tower Procedures

/

253

One of the best ways to prevent a runway incursion is to use and understand the appropriate phraseology for communicating with taxiing aircraft.
When the clearance to the aircraft begins with “Taxi to (runway number),” the
pilot is authorized to cross any and every taxiway and runway along the route.
The pilot does not know which of these runways are active and assumes that
any required coordination has been accomplished. If the aircraft is required
to taxi across an active runway en route to the departure runway, the ground
controller must coordinate with the local controller to receive permission to
cross the active runway. If that permission is not received, the ground controller must advise the pilot to stop prior to the runway. This is known as holding
short of the runway.
To differentiate a “hold short” type of clearance from the others, the
phraseology of this clearance has been somewhat modified. It includes the aircraft identification, the facility name, the departure runway number, the taxi
route, the words “hold short,” the position to hold, and the reason for holding
short. For example:
Jetblue twenty-three eleven, Lafayette ground, runway five, hold short of
runway one zero, traffic landing on one zero.
Cactus four fourteen, runway three two right via the cargo and the old scenic
taxiway, hold short of runway two seven left, traffic landing two seven left.
Kingair four papa uniform, runway one zero, hold short of the parallel taxiway,
traffic inbound on the taxiway.

If the aircraft must cross an active runway, the ground controller must receive
permission from the local controller and advise when the operation is complete
(see Figure 6–4). For example:
AMERICAN 810:
O’Hare ground, American eight ten ready to taxi.
GROUND CONTROLLER: American eight ten, O’Hare ground, runway two-seven

right via taxiway hotel, hold short of runway three two
right, traffic departing runway three two right.
AMERICAN 810:
American eight ten, roger, taxi to runway two-seven right,
hold short of runway three two right.
(as the aircraft approaches runway 32R)
GROUND CONTROLLER: (to the local controller): Cross three two right at hotel?
LOCAL CONTROLLER:
Cross runway three two right at hotel.
GROUND CONTROLLER: American eight ten, cross runway three two right.
AMERICAN 810:
American eight ten, roger.

If the aircraft must taxi quickly across the runway, the ground controller should
use either “taxi without delay” or “immediately.” “Taxi without delay” advises
the pilot to cross the runway safely but using a minimum of time. “Immediately” should be used only in an imminent emergency.
After the aircraft has crossed the active runway, the ground controller
must advise the local controller that the crossing is complete, either verbally or
through any visual means specified in the facility directives.

254 / CHAPTER 6

Figure 6–4. Airport taxi chart for Chicago O’Hare International Airport.

Control Tower Procedures

255

Areas other than the active runway where the ground controller may want
aircraft to hold short include the localizer, glide slope, and precision approach
critical areas. The ground controller should not authorize any aircraft or vehicular operation within the confines of a localizer or glide slope critical area when
both of the following conditions occur:
The reported weather conditions at the airport include a lower than 800-foot
ceiling or a reported visibility of less than 2 miles.
An arriving aircraft is using the ILS and is located between the outer marker
and the airport.

Since Category II and Category III ILS approaches permit the pilot to land
when visibilities are extremely low, it is necessary to provide additional obstacle
clearance during these approaches. Therefore, precision approach critical areas
have been defined and demarcated wherever a Category II or III ILS is in operation. Whenever the weather conditions are such that either the ceiling is less
than 200 feet AGL or the reported RVR visibility for the runway is 2,000 feet
or less, the ground controller is responsible for keeping aircraft and vehicles
clear of the obstacle critical area as an aircraft is conducting an approach or a
missed approach (see Figure 6–5).
It is the airport management’s responsibility to determine whether ILS
critical areas affect any runways or taxiways and to install appropriate signs
and markings to delineate these areas.

200 ft.
3,000 ft.

400 ft.

27R

Protecting
Critical Areas

/

400 ft.

Taxiing aircraft

Figure 6–5. Obstacle critical area.

Category II
hold line

256 / CHAPTER 6

Local Controller Duties
It is the responsibility of the local controller to safely sequence arrivals and
departures at the airport. The primary responsibility of the local controller
is to ensure that proper runway separation exists between aircraft. The local
controller issues appropriate instructions to arriving and departing aircraft to
ensure this runway separation. It is not the local controller’s responsibility to
separate VFR aircraft inbound to the airport, although the controller may offer
assistance and issue traffic advisories. It is assumed that the pilots will apply the
see and be seen rules of traffic avoidance.
Runway
Separation

For the purpose of runway separation, every aircraft is classified by aircraft
category. Aircraft categories are determined as follows:
CATEGORY I

Lightweight, single-engine, propeller-driven personal aircraft.
This category includes the Cessna 152 and 172, Piper
Cherokee, and Bellanca Viking. It does not include highperformance single-engine aircraft such as the T-28.

CATEGORY II

Lightweight, twin-engine, propeller-driven aircraft weighing
12,500 pounds or less. This category includes aircraft such as
the Twin Comanche, Piper Seneca, and Cessna 320, but does
not include larger aircraft such as the Lockheed Lodestar or
Douglas DC-3.

CATEGORY III

All other aircraft not included in either Category I or II.
This category includes high-performance single-engine,
large twin-engine, four-engine propeller-driven, and
turbojet aircraft. Category III includes aircraft such as
the Douglas DC-3 and DC-6, Cessna Citation, and
Boeing 757 and 777.

Departing Aircraft Separation The local controller is required to separate
departing aircraft using the same runway by ensuring that an aircraft does not
begin its takeoff roll until at least one of the following conditions exists:
1. The preceding landing aircraft has taxied off of the runway.
2. The preceding departing aircraft is airborne and has crossed the departure end
of the runway or has turned to avoid any conflict (see Figure 6–6). If the local
controller can determine runway distance using landmarks or runway markings,
the first aircraft need only be airborne before the second aircraft begins its
takeoff roll if the following minimum distance exists between the aircraft
involved (see Figure 6–7):
a. If both aircraft are Category I, a 3,000-foot separation interval may be used.
b. If a Category II aircraft precedes the Category I, a 3,000-foot separation
interval may be used.

Control Tower Procedures

/

257

Figure 6–6. Preceding aircraft must have crossed the departure threshold or turned
to avoid a conflict before the following aircraft can depart.

3,000 ft.
4,500 ft.
6,000 ft.

Figure 6–7. The following aircraft must wait until the preceding aircraft is both
airborne and a specified distance down the runway before it can begin its takeoff roll.

c. If the succeeding or both of the aircraft are Category II, a 4,500-foot
separation interval must be used.
d. If either of the aircraft is a Category III aircraft, a 6,000-foot separation
interval must be used.

Thus, if a Piper Cherokee (Category I) departs and is followed by a Cessna 152
(Category I), the local controller must not permit the Cessna to begin its takeoff
roll until the Piper has crossed the departure end of the runway, has turned to
avoid a conflict, or is airborne and at least 3,000 feet down the runway. But if
the Piper is followed by a Cessna 310 (Category II), the local controller must

258 / CHAPTER 6
not permit the Cessna 310 to begin its takeoff roll until the Piper has crossed
the departure end of the runway, has turned to avoid a conflict, or is airborne
and at least 4,500 feet down the runway. If the Cessna 310 precedes the Piper,
however, only 3,000 feet of separation would be needed.
To increase runway utilization, it may be advantageous to have the aircraft on the runway, in position to depart, waiting for the preceding aircraft to
complete its departure. When this procedure is used, the pilot can be advised to
“taxi into position and hold.” The controller should then state the reason that
the departure clearance is being withheld:
Bellanca six eight charlie, runway two three, taxi into position and hold, traffic
landing runway one zero.
Clipper one seventeen, runway two one center taxi into position and hold traffic
crossing the runway at midfield.

Controllers should be careful when using this clearance to ensure that the pilot
does not misinterpret the instruction as a takeoff clearance. It is for this reason
that the word “cleared” should never be included in a clearance to hold short
or to taxi into position and hold.
The instruction “cleared for takeoff” clears the pilot to perform a normal
takeoff on the runway specified. If more than one runway is active, the runway
number should precede the clearance. If additional departure instructions are
necessary, they should also precede the takeoff clearance:
United seven twenty-five, cleared for takeoff.
Kingair six papa uniform, runway two three, cleared for takeoff.
Cessna six niner eight, after departure fly heading one eight zero, runway one
five, cleared for takeoff.

When issuing a “cleared for immediate takeoff,” the controller is expecting
the pilot to minimize any delay in departing. The pilot will do his or her best
to comply with this clearance, but certain procedures may have to be performed
by the pilot while the airplane is still on the runway. If there is any doubt
about safe separation, one of the following alternative clearances should
be used:
“Cleared for immediate
takeoff or hold short”

The controller is advising the pilot that an
immediate departure is required. A pilot
who feels that a safe departure can be
accomplished will proceed; otherwise, he
or she will hold the aircraft short of the
runway.

“Cleared for immediate
takeoff or taxi off the
runway”

This clearance is most often used when an
aircraft has been taxied into position to
hold and departure clearance has been
delayed.

Control Tower Procedures

/

259

Here are some examples of phraseology:
Piedmont two fifty, runway one seven, cleared for immediate takeoff or hold
short, traffic one mile on final.
TWA six ninety-one, runway one eight, cleared for immediate takeoff or taxi off
the runway, traffic is a DC-9 landing runway two four.

Intersecting Runway Separation If the departing aircraft is taking off on a
runway that intersects another active runway, or if the flight path of the aircraft
will intersect another runway, the local controller must ensure that the aircraft
does not begin the takeoff roll until at least one of the following conditions
exists:
1. A preceding, landing aircraft has:
a. taxied off the landing runway, or
b. completed the landing roll and has advised the local controller that it will
stop prior to the runway intersection, or
c. passed the intersection (see Figure 6–8).
2. A preceding, departing aircraft is airborne and has passed the intersection or is
turning prior to the intersection to avert a conflict (see Figure 6–9).

(a)

(b)

(c)

Departing aircraft

Figure 6–8. Before the departing aircraft on the intersecting runway can be cleared
for takeoff, the arriving aircraft must have (a) landed and turned off the runway,
(b) landed and advised that it will hold short of the intersection, or (c) passed through
the intersection.

260 / CHAPTER 6

(b)
(a)

Departing aircraft

Figure 6–9. An aircraft departing on an intersecting runway must wait until the
preceding departure has either (a) passed through the intersection or (b) turned to
avoid a conflict.

Anticipated Separation The local controller need not actually wait for the
appropriate separation interval to clear an aircraft for takeoff. If there is
reasonable assurance that the correct separation will exist before the departing aircraft actually begins its takeoff roll, the clearance may be issued at
that time. This is known as anticipated separation. In accordance with the
FAA handbook, air traffic controllers are permitted to issue both anticipated
arrival and departure clearances if proper separation can be expected when
needed.
Arriving
Aircraft

IFR pilots use a standard instrument approach when arriving at the airport,
whereas VFR pilots approach the airport using all or a portion of a standardized traffic pattern. (A typical traffic pattern is shown in Figure 6–10.) It is the
local controller’s responsibility to properly space these two types of inbound
aircraft while also sequencing departures into the traffic flow. A VFR traffic
pattern consists of five portions known as traffic pattern legs:
UPWIND

A flight path parallel to the landing runway in the direction
of landings and departures.

CROSSWIND

A flight path at right angles to the landing runway on the
departure end.

DOWNWIND

A flight path parallel to the landing runway in the direction
opposite to landing.

Control Tower Procedures

/

261

Landing direction

Runway

Crosswind leg

Base leg

Downwind leg

Final approach

Upwind leg

Figure 6–10. Traffic pattern legs. This example depicts an aircraft in left traffic.

BASE

A flight path at right angles to the landing runway off its
approach end and extending from the downwind leg to the
intersection of the extended runway center line.

FINAL

A flight path in the direction of landing along the runway
centerline extending from the base leg to the runway.

If the turns performed by the aircraft in the pattern are to the left, the
traffic pattern is known as left traffic. If all turns are made to the right, it is
known as right traffic. Unless specified in the facility directives, either left or
right traffic can be used for any runway at a tower-controlled airport; left
traffic is considered standard at uncontrolled airports.
The local controller is required to apply runway separation standards
to arriving aircraft just like departures. This requirement is accomplished by
requiring the pilots to adjust their flight pattern as necessary to provide the following separation for single runways and intersecting runways.
Single Runway Separation If only one runway is in use, the local controller
must separate arriving aircraft from other aircraft by ensuring that the arriving
aircraft does not cross the landing threshold until at least one of the following
conditions exists:
1. If the preceding aircraft is an arrival, it has landed and taxied off of the runway
(see Figure 6–11). Between sunrise and sunset, the preceding aircraft need not

262 / CHAPTER 6

Figure 6–11. An arriving aircraft may not cross the landing threshold until the
preceding aircraft has landed and turned off of the runway.

3,000 ft.

Figure 6–12. An arriving Category I aircraft can be cleared to land if the preceding
aircraft has touched down, is a Category I aircraft, and is at least 3,000 feet down the
runway.

have taxied off of the runway if the distance between the two aircraft can be
determined using landmarks or runway markings, and the following minimums
can be maintained:
a. A distance of 3,000 feet if a Category I aircraft is landing behind either a
Category I or a Category II aircraft (see Figure 6–12).
b. A distance of 4,500 feet if a Category II aircraft is landing behind either a
Category I or a Category II aircraft (see Figure 6–13).
2. If the preceding aircraft is a departure, it must have already crossed the
departure end of the runway. This minimum can be disregarded if the departing
aircraft is airborne and is at least the following distance from the landing
threshold:
a. A distance of 3,000 feet if a Category I aircraft is landing behind either a
Category I or a Category II aircraft.

Control Tower Procedures

/

263

4,500 ft.

Figure 6–13. An arriving Category II aircraft can be cleared to land if the preceding
aircraft has touched down, is a Category I or II aircraft, and is at least 4,500 feet
down the runway.

Cat III
Cat II
Cat I

3,000 ft.
4,500 ft.
6,000 ft.

Figure 6–14. The following aircraft must wait until the preceding aircraft is airborne
and has traveled a specified distance down the runway before it can cross the landing
threshold.
b. A distance of 4,500 feet if a Category II aircraft is landing behind either a
Category I or a Category II aircraft.
c. A distance of 6,000 feet if either of the aircraft is a Category III aircraft (see
Figure 6–14).

Intersecting Runway Separation If intersecting runways are in use, a landing
aircraft must be sequenced so as not to cross the landing threshold until at least
one of the following conditions exists:
1. A departing aircraft from an intersecting runway has either crossed the
intersection or has turned to avert any conflict (see Figure 6–15).
2. An aircraft landing on the intersecting runway has taxied off the landing
runway, has crossed the runway intersection, or has completed the landing

264 / CHAPTER 6

Figure 6–15. Example of an intersecting runway departure separation.

roll and advised the local controller that the aircraft will hold short of the
intersecting runway.
3. When approved in the facility directives, the local controller may authorize an
aircraft to land on a runway that intersects the departure runway when all of
the following conditions can be met:
a. VFR conditions exist at the airport.
b. The aircraft has been instructed to hold short of the intersecting runway, has
been informed of the traffic departing on the intersecting runway, and has
acknowledged the instruction.
c. The departing aircraft has been advised that the other aircraft will be holding
short.
d. Both runways are clear and dry with no reports that the braking action is
less than “good.”
e. The aircraft instructed to hold short has no tailwind.
f. If requested by the pilot, the distance from the landing threshold to the
intersection has been issued by the local controller.

Facility directives specifically state which intersections may be used and
which aircraft group is authorized to hold short. The aircraft group number
can be found in Appendix B of the FAA handbook. Here is an example of
the phraseology to be used when landing aircraft are holding short (see also
Figure 6–16):

Control Tower Procedures

/

265

N18R
is cleared to land
using the full length
of runway 12

N2PA
is cleared to land
on runway 9 but
must hold short
of runway 12

Figure 6–16. Example of one aircraft holding short of an intersecting runway.

LOCAL CONTROLLER:
CHEROKEE 2PA:
LOCAL CONTROLLER:

SPORT 18R:

Land and
Hold Short
Operations

Cherokee two papa alpha, cleared to land runway niner, hold
short of runway one two, traffic landing runway one two.
Cherokee two papa alpha, roger.
Sport one eight romeo, cleared to land runway one
two, traffic landing runway niner will hold short of the
intersection.
Sport one eight romeo, roger.

At selected controlled airports where appropriate data have been published, air
traffic controllers may use an expanded procedure whereby they may clear a
pilot to land and hold short of an intersecting runway, an intersecting taxiway,
or some other designated point on the runway. This operation is known as a land
and hold short operation (LAHSO). Once procedures have been developed and
approved and appropriate runway or taxiway signage has been installed, controllers may routinely issue LAHSO clearances. LAHSO procedures improve
the efficiency of certain airports by essentially eliminating crossing runways.
Although the runways (or runway and taxiway) in question may in reality cross
each other, by requesting that a pilot hold short, the controller can move traffic
as if the runways were physically disconnected from each other.
Pilots may accept LAHSO clearances provided they determine that their
aircraft can safely land and stop within the available landing distance (ALD).
ALD data are published in the special notices section of the Airport Facility
Directory (AFD) (see Table 6–2). Controllers can also provide ALD data to the
pilot upon request. Although controllers may routinely issue LAHSO clearances, the pilot in command has the final authority to accept or decline any
land and hold short clearance. The safety and operation of the aircraft remain
the responsibility of the pilot. Pilots are expected to decline a LAHSO clearance
if they determine it will compromise safety.

266 / CHAPTER 6
Table 6–2.

LAHSO Runway Distance Information
Landing Runway

Hold Short Point

Distance Available

09R

14L–32R

6,100

10

Taxiway S

12,156

14R

10–28

9,800

22R

09R–27L

6,050

27L

04L–22R

5,700

28

14R–32L

6,500

When LAHSO operations are conducted, that information is included on
the taped ATIS broadcasts to pilots. The pilots should, as part of their pre-flight
briefing, review any applicable LAHSO procedures and check to see whether
their aircraft can meet the LAHSO requirements (see Figure 6–16).
Here is an example of the phraseology to be used:
AIR TRAFFIC CONTROLLER:

N234PU:
AIR TRAFFIC CONTROLLER:

N252MN:

Spacing
Aircraft

Cherokee two three four papa uniform, cleared to
land runway one zero, hold short of taxiway bravo
for crossing traffic, traffic is a Cessna one seventy-two.
Cherokee two three four papa uniform, wilco, cleared to
land runway one zero to hold short of taxiway bravo.
Cherokee two five two mike november, cross runway
one zero at taxiway bravo, landing aircraft will hold
short.
Cherokee two five two mike november, wilco, cross
runway one zero at bravo, landing traffic to hold.

The local controller may use any of the following phrases to achieve proper
spacing of aircraft in the traffic pattern:
1. “Enter (pattern leg) runway (runway number).” The controller uses this phrase
to direct the pilot to enter one of the five identified pattern legs. For example:
Cessna niner papa uniform, enter left downwind runway two three.
2. “Report (position).” For the purposes of identifying and spacing aircraft, the
pilot can be requested to make various position reports. The controller may request
distance from the airport, distance from the runway, distance from a prominent
landmark, or entry into the pattern. This request is usually combined with the
previous instruction:
Diamond eight delta mike, report three miles north of the airport.
Cherokee two papa uniform, enter left downwind for runway five, report over
the red and white water tower.
Sport zero two romeo, report two mile final runway one zero.

Control Tower Procedures

/

267

3. “Number (sequence number, runway).” This phrase advises the pilot of the
planned landing sequence for the aircraft. The pilot assumes that the preceding aircraft
is landing on the same runway unless stated otherwise. If the local controller is using
more than one runway for arrivals, the pilot should be advised of the sequence for the
airport and for the arrival runway. This instruction is usually used in conjunction with
a “follow” phrase.
4. “Follow (description and location).” Once the preceding aircraft has been
located and identified, it is the pilot’s responsibility to provide the proper spacing in
the traffic pattern. The local controller should advise the pilot of the location and type
of the preceding aircraft to make it easier to locate and follow.
5. “Traffic is (description and location) landing (runway).” If the landing aircraft
is sequenced behind an aircraft landing on a different runway, the pilot should be
advised of the type and location of the preceding aircraft in order to provide proper
spacing. The controller may refer to a local landmark or to the pilot’s aircraft when
pointing out the preceding traffic:
Cherokee niner alpha uniform, number two runway two three.
Bellanca six alpha victor, follow the twin Cessna ahead and to your right.
Twin Beech one seven three, enter and report left base for runway two three,
number two for the airport, traffic is a Cessna on a quarter mile final runway
one zero.

Spacing
Instructions

The following instructions can be used to either increase or decrease the spacing between aircraft in the traffic pattern.
“Extend Downwind/Upwind” The pilot can be requested to extend either
the downwind or the upwind leg a specified distance or until over a prominent
landmark. The pilot should never be requested to extend the crosswind leg
unless it is absolutely necessary. Extending the crosswind leg will result in the
downwind leg being flown far enough from the airport that the pilot may be
unable to glide to the runway in case of engine failure. An extension to the base
leg is impossible since the distance from the downwind leg to the final leg is
fixed. Here are examples of the phraseology:
United six sixteen, extend downwind one mile to give room for a departure.
Cessna one niner foxtrot, extend upwind to the lake.

“Short Approach” A short approach is a request for the pilot to shorten the
downwind leg as much as possible, which results in an equivalent reduction in
the length of the final approach leg (see Figure 6–17). Because the pilot is still
required to fly a pattern within the capabilities of the aircraft, this request may
not provide consistent results. Some pilots may be able to fly a very short pattern, whereas others are unable to do so.
“Make Left (or Right)” In a normal traffic pattern, the pilot makes a 90°
turn when transitioning from one leg to another. One method of increasing
the spacing between two aircraft is to request that the pilot turn 270° in the

268 / CHAPTER 6

Downwind leg

Normal pattern

Runway
Short approach

Figure 6–17. Example of an aircraft conducting a short approach.

Left 270∞ turn
Left 360∞
turn

Runway

27

Right 360∞
turn

Normal pattern

Figure 6–18. Example of a 360° turn and a 270° turn while in the traffic pattern.

“wrong” direction when transitioning to the next leg (see Figure 6–18). For
instance, if the pilot is on a right downwind, a request to “make a left two
seventy to base” will result in a longer turn and increased separation. If the
pilot is not transitioning from one leg to another and increased spacing is
necessary, a 360° turn in either direction may be requested (“Sport one two
romeo, make a right three sixty”). Caution should be used when issuing such
instructions, since they can be potentially disorienting to pilots. Controllers
should also refrain from using these methods when the aircraft has begun to
descend from pattern altitude and is on either the base or final leg. It can be
dangerous for a pilot to perform these maneuvers at low airspeeds while close
to the ground.
“Go Around” If it is apparent that proper runway separation cannot be
achieved and neither aircraft’s traffic pattern can be adjusted, it will be necessary to cancel landing clearance for one of the aircraft. In this case, the local
controller determines which aircraft’s landing clearance should be cancelled
and instructs that aircraft to “go around.” Upon receipt of this instruction, the

Control Tower Procedures

/

269

pilot will immediately begin a climb to pattern altitude and will reenter the
traffic pattern as instructed. Here are some examples of phraseology:
American six eleven, go around, enter right downwind runway two seven left.
Cessna niner eight delta, go around, enter left base for runway two five.

“Cleared to Land” This clearance authorizes the pilot to make a full-stop
landing. If the local controller is using anticipated separation and has cleared
more than one aircraft to land, the preceding traffic should be included in
the landing clearance. Any restrictions or requests should precede this clearance. These might include instructions to hold short of a runway or to plan to
turn off of the runway at a designated taxiway. If the local controller should
be able to see the landing aircraft but cannot do so either visually or using
radar, the phrase “not in sight” should be added to the landing clearance. This
phrase alerts the pilot to the fact that the controller is unsure of the aircraft’s
position. It is not uncommon for a pilot to be in contact with the control
tower at one airport while mistakenly attempting to land at another. Advising
the pilot that the aircraft is not in sight will make the pilot aware that they
might be approaching the wrong airport. Here are some examples of landing
phraseology:
Cessna two six mike, cleared to land runway two three.
Tomahawk six four november, not in sight, cleared to land runway one zero.
United one twenty-five, cleared to land runway two three, traffic landing
runway one zero.
Clipper four seventeen, cleared to land runway one four right, hold short of
runway niner right, traffic landing runway niner right.

After the aircraft has landed, the local controller should advise the pilot where
to exit the runway and what frequency to use for contacting the ground
controller.
“Cleared for Touch and Go” A touch and go clearance permits an aircraft
to land on the runway but to take off again before actually coming to a stop.
This maneuver is usually used by students practicing takeoffs and landings. An
aircraft performing a touch and go is considered an arriving aircraft until actually touching down and then is considered a departure.
“Cleared for Stop and Go” A stop and go clearance is similar to a touch and
go except that the aircraft comes to a full stop on the runway before beginning
its takeoff run. A stop and go is also considered an arriving aircraft until coming to a complete stop, after which it is considered a departure.
“Cleared for Low Approach” In a low approach, the pilot approaches to land
on the runway but does not actually make contact with the runway surface.
Upon reaching the desired altitude, the pilot begins a climb. Low approaches

270 / CHAPTER 6
are usually used by pilots practicing instrument approaches. In many cases, the
pilot may wish to execute the published missed approach procedure. When it
is desirable to determine the pilot’s intentions prior to issuing this clearance,
the controller may ask the pilot, “State your intentions.” An aircraft conducting
a low approach is considered an arriving aircraft until it crosses the landing
threshold, after which it is considered a departure.
“Cleared for the Option” An option clearance permits the pilot to perform a
landing, touch and go, stop and go, or low approach. The pilot will not typically inform the controller which option he or she has chosen. This maneuver
is generally used in flight training to permit a flight instructor to evaluate a
student’s performance under changing conditions. If the controller is unable to
approve all the options, the following phraseology should be used to restrict
the pilot to the options that can be safely accommodated:
Sport one three romeo, unable option, make a full-stop landing.
Cessna three niner eight, unable stop and go, other options approved.

Runway
Selection

Since aircraft landing into the wind touch down at lower ground speeds that
shorten the landing roll, most pilots, when given a choice, prefer to land or
depart on a runway as nearly aligned with the wind as possible. Unless otherwise specified by facility directives, it is usually the local controller’s responsibility to decide which runway becomes the active runway. Local controllers
should comply with the following guidelines from the FAA handbook when
selecting active runways:
1. Whenever the wind speed is greater than 5 knots, use the runway most nearly
aligned with the wind.
2. The calm wind runway should be used whenever the wind is less than 5 knots.
The calm wind runway will be specified by the airport management and is
contained in the facility directives. This runway is chosen to maximize arrivals
and departures while minimizing the noise impact on local dwellings.
3. The local controller can use any other runway when it is operationally
advantageous to do so.
4. If a runway use program has been designated for the facility, the runways
specified in the program should be used as the active runways.

Runway Use
Programs

To minimize the noise impact of landing and departing aircraft, the FAA has
implemented a nationwide Aviation Noise Abatement Policy. This policy places
the primary responsibility for planning and implementing a noise abatement
program on the operator of each airport. The runway use program put into
place may be either informal or formal.
Informal runway use programs primarily affect aircraft that weigh more
than 12,500 pounds. At airports with informal runway use programs, the controllers will assign these aircraft to the runway chosen by airport management
whenever all of the following conditions can be met:

Control Tower Procedures

/

271

The wind direction is within 90° of the runway heading.
The wind does not exceed 15 knots.
The runway is clear and dry, which means that there is no snow, ice, slush, or
water on the runway.

If pilots wish to use a different runway from that specified in the informal
runway use program, they are expected to inform the controller. Air traffic
controllers are required to honor these requests, but they will advise the pilot
that the runway is “noise sensitive.”
If airport management wishes to have aircraft use specific runways even
when the runway conditions exceed those listed earlier, a formal runway use
program must be initiated. A formal program requires that aircraft operators,
airport management, and the FAA consummate a letter of agreement specifying the preferential runways and the weather conditions that must exist to
use those runways. The establishment of a letter of agreement ensures that
everyone concerned completely understands the conditions of the runway use
program. The letter of agreement specifies that although pilots are expected to
comply with these procedures, pilot requests for other runways will be honored. However, the pilot will be advised that the previously assigned runway is
specified in the formal runway use program.

Helicopter Operations
Helicopters can taxi around the airport by ground taxiing, hover taxiing, or
air taxiing. Ground taxiing of a helicopter is similar to that of a taxiing plane.
Only those helicopters equipped with landing gear are able to ground taxi. In
hover taxiing, the helicopter actually lifts off of the ground and remains airborne while maneuvering around the airport. A hover-taxiing helicopter usually remains within about 50 feet of the ground and proceeds at airspeeds less
than 20 knots. Helicopters that are air taxiing operate below 100 feet and
proceed at speeds in excess of 20 knots.
Each type of taxiing has its advantages and disadvantages. Ground taxiing is the most fuel efficient of the three and creates less air turbulence around
and behind the helicopter. Hover taxiing is much faster than ground taxiing
but creates a high level of air turbulence both below and behind the helicopter.
Air taxiing is the fastest method and actually creates less air turbulence since
the helicopter is at a greater altitude and most of the air turbulence is directed
backward. Whenever a helicopter is taxiing, aircraft in the vicinity should be
advised that it could be creating wake turbulence.
Helicopters are unique in that they may descend and climb with little
or no forward movement. Nevertheless, helicopter pilots must be careful that
they never depart from the safe flight envelope. For a pilot to properly control

272 / CHAPTER 6
the aircraft in case of an engine failure, a helicopter must have sufficient speed,
altitude, or a combination of the two to safely perform a maneuver known as
an autorotation. An autorotation is similar to a glide in a fixed-wing aircraft.
During an autorotation, the helicopter descends at a rapid rate but is able to
reduce that rate of descent just prior to touchdown. Typically, a hovering helicopter needs about 600 feet of altitude to safely perform an autorotation. A
helicopter travelling forward at a speed of about 40 knots needs virtually no
altitude to autorotate. Keeping these factors in mind, helicopter pilots normally
prefer to approach for landing in a manner similar to fixed-wing pilots. The
only difference is that the helicopter does not need to use the entire length of
the runway to decelerate.

Wake Turbulence
Every aircraft in flight trails an area of unstable air behind it known as wake
turbulence. This turbulence was originally attributed to “prop wash” but is
now known to be caused in part by a pair of counter-rotating vortices trailing
from the wing tips (see Figure 6–19). These vortices are a by-product of the lift
produced by the wing, which is generated by the creation of a pressure differential between the lower and the upper wing surfaces. High pressure is created
below the wing, while low pressure is created above. The resultant upward

Vortex core

Figure 6–19. Wake turbulence behind an aircraft.

Control Tower Procedures

/

273

Vortex flow

Vortex core

Figure 6–20. Example of vortex rotation and movement behind an aircraft.

pressure on the wing, known as lift, causes whirling vortices of airflow to be
created at the wing tip. The airflow along the wing pushes this upward flow
backward, creating a whirling body of air that resembles a horizontal tornado
(see Figure 6–20).
Each wing produces its own vortex, resulting in two counter-rotating
cylindrical vortices trailing from each aircraft. The strength of the vortex is
governed by the weight, speed, and shape of the wing of the generating aircraft.
In general, the maximum vortex generation occurs when the generating aircraft
is heavy and slow—precisely the conditions found during takeoff and landing.
Wing-tip vortices created by larger aircraft can completely encompass smaller
aircraft. The rotational velocities in these vortices have been measured as high
as 133 knots. A small aircraft encountering one of these vortices may become
completely uncontrollable.
Wing-tip vortices begin to be generated the moment an aircraft’s nose
wheel lifts from the ground and are continually created until the aircraft lands
(see Figure 6–21). These vortices tend to descend at 500 feet per minute until
they level off at about 900 feet below the aircraft’s cruising altitude. They
remain at this point until dissipating (see Figure 6–22). If while descending they
make contact with the Earth’s surface, they tend to move outward at a speed
of about 5 knots. Any surface wind will tend to dissipate and move these vortices. A crosswind will tend to increase the speed of the downwind vortex while

274 / CHAPTER 6

Rotation

Wake begins

Touchdown

Wake ends

Figure 6–21. Wake turbulence starts when a departing aircraft’s nose wheel leaves the ground. It stops when
a landing aircraft’s nose wheel touches the ground.

Sink rate 400/500 ft. per min.
Residual chop
remains
Max. sink
800/900 ft.

Breakup
starts

Figure 6–22. Wake turbulence behind an aircraft as it descends and dissipates. The wake turbulence will
descend at 500 feet per minute until it begins to break up approximately 900 to 1,000 feet below the
cruising altitude of the originating aircraft.

Control Tower Procedures

/

275

5-knot wind
10 knots
(5 + 5)

Upwind vortex stationary
Vortex movement in ground effect with crosswind

Figure 6–23. Wake turbulence near the ground will begin to move horizontally at
approximately 5 knots. A 5-knot crosswind will effectively “stall” one of the vortices
over the runway until it dissipates 2 minutes later.

impeding the progress of the upwind vortex (see Figure 6–23). A cross wind
between 3 and 7 knots may prevent the upwind vortex from moving.
Although it is primarily the pilot’s responsibility to avoid wake turbulence, controllers are required to assist the pilots of smaller aircraft whenever they fly behind an aircraft that could be creating potentially dangerous
wake turbulence. For the purposes of wake turbulence separation minima,
the FAA has classified every aircraft as small, large, or heavy. Small aircraft
are aircraft whose maximum certificated takeoff weight is less than or equal
to 41,000 pounds. Large aircraft have maximum certificated takeoff weights
greater than 41,000 pounds up to and including 255,000 pounds. Heavy aircraft
have maximum certificated takeoff weights in excess of 255,000 pounds. The
controller should be aware that pilots following large or heavy aircraft may
wish to adjust their flight patterns to avoid their ensuing wake turbulence.
Wake turbulence is generated from the moment a departing aircraft’s nose
wheel leaves the ground until it lands and the nose wheel is lowered to the
runway. For this reason, aircraft departing behind a large or heavy jet will
usually plan to rotate their nose wheel before reaching the preceding aircraft’s
rotation point and attempt to climb at a greater angle than that aircraft. If they
are unable to climb at a greater angle, a slight turn will usually permit them to
avoid the wake turbulence (see Figure 6–24).
Pilots must also be aware of aircraft departing from parallel runways.
If the parallel runways are less than 2,500 feet apart, it is quite possible that
the wing-tip vortices may drift from one runway to the other (see Figure 6–25).
In these cases, the pilot of the smaller aircraft will attempt to rotate prior to the
point of rotation of the heavy aircraft.

276 / CHAPTER 6

Heavy transport

Light transport

Light airplane

Figure 6–24. To avoid wake turbulence, departing aircraft should rotate prior to the
point of rotation of the preceding aircraft and should climb at a steeper angle.

Touchdown point

Wind

Figure 6–25. Aircraft landing on parallel runways could encounter wake turbulence
“blown” over from the parallel runway.

Since the wake turbulence caused by an arriving aircraft ceases when the
heavy aircraft’s nose wheel settles to the ground upon landing, pilots of smaller
aircraft following heavy aircraft will attempt to remain above the flight path of
the heavy aircraft and land beyond the point where the heavy aircraft touched
down (see Figure 6–26). Small aircraft following the same flight path as the
heavy aircraft (such as on an ILS glide slope) rarely encounter wake turbulence
since the wing-tip vortices will descend fairly rapidly.

Control Tower Procedures

/

277

60

Touchdown point

9,000 ft.
3,000 ft.

Figure 6–26. To avoid wake turbulence, landing aircraft should plan to touch down
beyond the point where the preceding aircraft’s nose wheel touched the ground.

Aircraft following a heavy jet making a low approach, stop and go, or
touch and go landing are in the most danger because there may not be any
safe area of the runway on which to land. In this case, the best procedure is to
delay the following aircraft’s arrival or departure for at least 2 minutes to let
the wing-tip vortices dissipate.
Tower controllers must apply the following procedures to small aircraft
following larger aircraft creating potentially dangerous wake turbulence. (Controllers in an approach control or in an ARTCC have a different set of procedures with which they must comply. Those procedures are explained in detail
in Chapter 9.)
Since wake turbulence tends to dissipate in a matter of minutes, time is used
as a means of ensuring that a following aircraft does not encounter any severe
wake turbulence. In general, the following aircraft will usually be delayed by either
a 2- or 3-minute interval wherever dangerous wake turbulence might exist.
Two minutes of separation must be applied to any aircraft departing
behind a heavy aircraft using the same runway or a parallel runway if the
runways are separated by less than 2,500 feet. Two minutes of separation
must also be applied to an aircraft whose flight path will cross that of a heavy
jet departing from an intersecting runway. The pilot of the following aircraft
may waive this wake turbulence separation by stating “Request waiver of the

278 / CHAPTER 6
2-minute interval” or by making a similar statement. This request means that
the pilot has accepted responsibility for wake turbulence separation.
Three minutes of separation must be provided to any small aircraft
departing behind a large aircraft whenever the small aircraft is departing from
an intersection or in the opposite direction on the same runway. This interval
may be waived upon pilot request. A 3-minute interval will also be provided
to any small aircraft departing behind a heavy aircraft whenever the small aircraft is departing from an intersection or in the opposite direction on the same
runway. This 3-minute interval may not be waived by the pilot.
A second type of wake turbulence, produced by turbine engines, propellers,
and helicopter rotor blades, is fairly localized and not long lasting but can be
just as dangerous to an unsuspecting pilot. The wake turbulence found behind a
turbine engine can overturn or hurl a small aircraft hundreds of feet. Controllers
must always remember that the cockpit of a small aircraft is fairly noisy and the
pilot may not be able to hear the engine noise of a nearby jet. The pilots of small
aircraft should thus be warned whenever they are taxiing behind jet aircraft.

KEY TERMS
air taxiing
aircraft category
aircraft group
amendment (AM)
anticipated separation
automated radar terminal system
(ARTS)
Automatic Terminal Information
Service (ATIS)
autorotation
Aviation Noise Abatement Policy
calm wind runway
ceilometer
clearance delivery controller
critical areas
departure message
fields
flight data controller
flight data input/output (FDIO)
flight data processing (FDP)

flight progress strips
formal runway use program
ground controller
ground taxiing
heavy aircraft
holding short
hover taxiing
inactive runways
informal runway use program
land and hold short operation
(LAHSO)
large aircraft
left traffic
local controller
low approach
National Beacon Code Allocation
Plan (NBCAP)
National Weather Service (NWS)
nonradar-approach control
towers

option clearance
pilot reports (PIREPs)
radar-approach control towers
right traffic
runway incursion
runway separation
runway use program
short approach
small aircraft
stop and go clearance
strip request (SR)
taxiways
touch and go clearance
tower visibility
traffic pattern
traffic pattern legs
VFR towers
wake turbulence

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. What are the four operating positions in a control tower, and what are the duties
assigned to each?
2. What are the separation minima for departing aircraft?
3. What are the separation minima for arriving aircraft?
4. What may the pilot be asked to hold short of during LAHSO procedures?

7
Nonradar En Route
and Terminal Separation
Checkpoints
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
1. State the four methods of nonradar separation.
2. Deﬁne the dimensions of the area generally assigned to each aircraft.
3. Generally state how nonradar separation is applied to aircraft.
4. Be familiar with the methods of marking an aircraft’s reported position
on a ﬂight progress strip.
5. Determine the appropriate holding pattern to be used in any given situation.

280 / CHAPTER 7

Design of Separation Procedures
Before the widespread installation and use of radar for air traffic control, controllers could not accurately determine the location of the aircraft they were
attempting to separate. In most cases, the required separation was accomplished
by instructing the pilot to change course or altitude or to enter a holding pattern. Direct radio communication between the controller and the pilot was not
always possible, and pilot-controller communication was passed through intermediaries, such as airline radio operators or Interstate Airway Communication
Stations. The resultant time delay, as long as 30 minutes, further complicated
the controller’s task. Some of this delay was alleviated through the development
and use of remote radio transmitters and receivers known as remote communication air/ground (RCAG) devices. RCAG devices permitted controllers to
communicate with pilots whose aircraft were beyond the range of the radio
transmitters at the control facility. RCAG units used telephone circuitry connected to remote radio transmitters and receivers.
Even with the help of RCAG equipment, controllers were still unable to
accurately determine an aircraft’s position and had to rely on pilot reports and
handwritten flight progress strips to separate aircraft. Using procedures developed by the CAA and relying on flight strips to remember each aircraft’s approximate position, the controller could crudely effect aircraft separation.
The flight progress strips became an invaluable tool in helping controllers perform their separation duties. Through the use of standardized procedures and markings, trained controllers could use these strips to visualize the
relative position of every aircraft and apply the proper separation procedures.
Whenever the controller issued an instruction to a pilot or the pilot made a
position or altitude report, the controller wrote the information on the flight
progress strip. The strip could then be readily interpreted to determine the
status of the aircraft. This information aided the controller in visualizing the
position of each aircraft and made it much easier for other controllers to evaluate the airspace. The flight progress strip also became a valuable record of the
instructions issued by the controller and any reports made by the pilot, in case
of an investigation following an incident or an accident. It was the controller’s responsibility to constantly update the information contained on the flight
progress strip to be able to visualize both the present and, more important, the
future position of every aircraft being separated.
When the first ATCUs were conceived in the 1930s, controllers had few
hard-and-fast rules for separating aircraft. Commonsense rules and the experience gained as the air traffic control system matured formed the basis of
separation procedures. However, as traffic increased and the air traffic control
system grew in size and complexity, the CAA began to develop a set of rules
and procedures to be used by air traffic controllers.
It might appear fairly simple to develop such procedures, but in actuality
it is far more difficult than one might expect. Air traffic control procedures specialists are employed by the FAA to develop these separation procedures and

Nonradar En Route and Terminal Separation

/

281

must consider many variables to ensure that aircraft that seem to be separated
actually are. They must take every variable that affects the air traffic control
system into consideration when developing these procedures. Some of these
variables include ground-based navigation equipment error, airborne navigation equipment error, different navigation systems in use by the pilots, winds
aloft, and communications delay.
The designers of the air traffic control system must consider the worstcase scenario and must ensure that even with the maximum possible error in
each component of the system a sufficient margin of safety will still exist. Consider the following example. Suppose that there are two fictitious intersections,
alpha and bravo, defined as the intersection of radials emanating from two
VORTACs (uniform and victor). Alpha is the intersection of the 180° radial
of the uniform VORTAC and the 270° radial of the victor VORTAC, whereas
bravo is the intersection of the 170° radial of the uniform VORTAC and the
260° radial of the victor VORTAC.
Looking at the illustration in Figure 7–1, your first impression might
be that each of these intersections is in a different physical location and that
an aircraft directly over the alpha intersection would be separated from an
aircraft over the bravo intersection. But an evaluation by a trained airspace
procedures specialist would reveal that this might not be the case. The expert
would immediately realize that because the VOR equipment on board an aircraft is permitted to be accurate within ⫾6° to be certified for IFR flight, each
aircraft might not be located directly over each intersection. If we assume that
the maximum VOR receiver error exists in each aircraft’s navigation system,
it becomes apparent that an aircraft reporting over the alpha intersection may
not be located exactly on the 180° radial of the uniform VORTAC but may in
fact be anywhere between the 174° and the 186° radial. Using the same margin
of error, the aircraft might also be located anywhere between the 264° and
the 276° radial of the victor VORTAC. When determining where an aircraft
that has reported over the alpha intersection is actually located, the air traffic
controller must assume that the aircraft might be located anywhere within the
shaded area shown in Figure 7–2. If the position of the second aircraft is then
calculated using the same margin of error, it becomes apparent that an aircraft
that has reported over the alpha intersection may not actually be separated
from an aircraft that has just reported over the bravo intersection—they may
in fact be located in the same approximate position and about to collide.
This is a simplistic example of just one of the problems that airspace
planners and air traffic controllers face when trying to effect safe separation
using nonradar techniques. When every variable is taken into account, aircraft
are not always precisely located over the intersections where their pilots report.
To take all variables into consideration, the controller must reserve a block of
airspace for each aircraft. The size of this block is partially determined by the
variables mentioned earlier and by such other factors as the aircraft’s performance, altitude, navigation system, and distance from the navaid. Because of
the variables inherent in this type of separation, the controller must assume that

282 / CHAPTER 7

Uniform
VORTAC

Alpha
intersection
Victor
VORTAC

270° radial

260° radial
Bravo
intersection

180° radial

170° radial

Figure 7–1. At first glance, it appears that the alpha and bravo intersections are
located in two different places.

the aircraft could be located anywhere within this block of airspace and must
then separate every block of airspace accordingly.
Because each aircraft might be located anywhere within its reserved area,
it is necessary for the controller to separate each aircraft’s reserved airspace
from the airspace reserved for other aircraft. Areas of reserved airspace may
butt up against one another, but they must never be allowed to overlap, since
any overlap might permit two aircraft to actually come into contact. The separation of each aircraft’s reserved airspace is the only way to ensure that the
aircraft within that airspace remain safely separated.

Nonradar En Route and Terminal Separation

/

283

Uniform
VORTAC

Alpha
intersection
Intersection
overlap

276°

Victor
VORTAC

270° radial
266°
264°
260° radial
Bravo
intersection

254°
186°

174°
164°
176°

180° radial

170° radial

Figure 7–2. In reality, when navigation receiver tolerances are taken into consideration,
the alpha and bravo intersections may actually overlap. Thus, an aircraft reporting
over alpha may conflict with an aircraft reporting over bravo.

Airspace Dimensions
The width of an aircraft’s reserved block of airspace is normally the width
of the airway on which the aircraft is navigating. As long as the aircraft is
within 51 nautical miles of the navigation aid providing guidance for that airway segment, the airway is 8 nautical miles wide—4 nautical miles on either
side of the airway centerline (see Figure 7–3). The width of any airway segment
greater than 51 miles from the navaid is defined as the area between two lines
that diverge at an angle of 4.5°, centered on the airway centerline. Whenever

284 / CHAPTER 7
Airway boundary

4 n mi

Airway

8 n mi

centerline

4 n mi

Airway boundary

Figure 7–3. Example of the width of an aircraft’s protected airspace.

Upper limit

500 ft.

1,000 ft.

Assigned altitude

500 ft.

Lower limit

Figure 7–4. Example of the depth of an aircraft’s protected airspace.

an aircraft is cleared to operate on an airway, the entire width of that airway
is reserved for that aircraft.
The depth of the reserved block of airspace for aircraft operating at or
below FL 290 is 1,000 feet. This area extends from 500 feet above the aircraft
to 500 feet below the aircraft (see Figure 7–4). If the aircraft is operating
above FL 290, the depth of the reserved airspace becomes 2,000 feet, extending 1,000 feet both above and below the aircraft. The distance is increased

Nonradar En Route and Terminal Separation

/

285

above FL 290 because aneroid altimeters are unable to measure small pressure
changes at high altitudes, and the additional distance is needed to provide for
accurate separation.
The length of the reserved airspace extends some specified time or distance ahead of the aircraft’s last position. This reserved area usually extends
10 minutes in front of the aircraft. If the aircraft is either DME or RNAV
equipped, the time requirement may be converted into a reserved distance of
20 nautical miles. Under certain circumstances, if the speed of the aircraft can
be accurately determined, the time or distance requirement may be reduced.
The exact dimensions of the reserved airspace and the procedures applied
by the controller vary depending on the aircraft’s speed, navigational capability,
altitude, and distance from the navigation aid. Thus, specific conditions that
apply to individual situations are covered throughout this chapter.

Separation Procedures
When separating aircraft participating in the air traffic control system, the controller is required to ensure that the airspace reserved for one aircraft does not
overlap the airspace reserved for another. If an overlap does occur, even if the
two aircraft are miles apart, it is presumed that adequate separation does not
exist and that a separation error has occurred. Controllers use four methods
for separating aircraft: vertical, lateral, longitudinal, and visual separation. To
ensure that the aircraft are in fact separated, the controller needs to apply at
least one of these methods at any given time.
Since most of these methods are based on pilot report of position or
altitude, the successful application of nonradar separation procedures depends
on the accuracy of pilot reports. If a controller has any reason to suspect
that a report may be in error, he or she must resolve the situation as soon as
possible.
Although the widespread installation and use of radar has reduced the
need for these procedures, they are still used by controllers whenever radar
procedures cannot be applied. In many cases, even radar controllers will use
some of these methods, since they may be easier to apply than radar separation procedures. Nonradar separation methods are still the primary means of
separating air traffic in areas of limited or nonexistent radar coverage. Radar
controllers must therefore remain proficient in these methods in case of a radar
malfunction or failure.
The primary principle to be observed when applying nonradar separation
procedures is that any two aircraft are presumed not to be separated unless
separation can be positively proven using one or more of the four methods. The
use of any single method is considered proof that separation exists.
Vertical
Separation

Basic Vertical Separation Rule Vertical separation is one of the easiest ways
to separate two aircraft. As long as both aircraft are at altitudes that differ by
at least 1,000 feet, they are separated vertically. Since every aircraft’s reserved

286 / CHAPTER 7
airspace extends from 500 feet above it to 500 feet below, two aircraft separated by at least 1,000 feet are considered to be separated vertically.
The usual method of vertical separation is for the controller to request that
the pilot report passing through or leveling off at a particular altitude. Once
the pilot has reported an altitude, the controller can assign another altitude
to a different aircraft, as long as the two altitudes differ by at least 1,000 feet.
The Aeronautical Information Manual states that pilots should report leaving
any previously assigned altitude. It does not state that the pilot must report
passing through any intermediate altitude or arriving at the assigned altitude.
Controllers must always presume that unless they request otherwise, pilots will
report only when their aircraft leaves an assigned altitude. Pilots will not report
passing through or leveling off at any other altitude unless the controller makes
such a request. The phraseology that should be used by a controller to request
an altitude report is as follows:
CONTROLLER:
UNITED 721:

UNITED 721:
CONTROLLER:
UNITED 721:
CONTROLLER:

United seven twenty-one, descend and maintain six thousand,
report leaving eight thousand and report reaching six thousand.
United seven twenty-one, roger, leaving niner thousand for six
thousand. [This pilot report is mandatory, because the previously
assigned altitude is now being vacated.] We will report leaving eight
thousand and reaching six thousand.
United seven twenty-one leaving eight thousand.
United seven twenty-one, roger.
United seven twenty-one is level at six thousand.
United seven twenty-one, roger.

Flight Progress Strip Marking Whenever a new altitude is assigned by the controller, it is written on the appropriate flight progress strip. This altitude is written
in field 9 on a terminal flight progress strip and field 20 on a flight strip used by
center controllers. The last two zeros of the altitude figure are always omitted
because of the limited space available on a flight progress strip. Thus, 8,000 feet is
written as “80” and 6,000 feet is written as “60”. When the pilot reports leaving
an altitude, that altitude is lined out on the flight strip with a single line.
Pilots will report passing through intermediate altitudes only if requested
to do so by the controller. Such requests must be properly notated by writing
the letters RL (for report leaving) or RR (for report reaching) next to the appropriate altitude on the flight progress strip. For example, when a pilot reports
leaving 8,000 feet, the entire “80 RL” is lined out, signifying that the aircraft
has vacated 8,000 feet. But when the pilot reports reaching 6,000 feet, only
the “RR” next to the “60” is lined out (see Figure 7–5). This signifies that the
aircraft has arrived and is level at 6,000 feet. The “60” is not lined out, as that
would signify that the aircraft has vacated 6,000 feet.
Since the flight progress strips are official documents that could be used
during an investigation, mistakes made when writing on them should never be
erased but should always be crossed out with an X. Mistakes should not be
lined out because that could indicate that the aircraft in question has actually
vacated an altitude.

Nonradar En Route and Terminal Separation

/

287

Figure 7–5. Example of proper strip marking to indicate than an aircraft has reported
leaving 8,000 feet and has reported reaching 6,000 feet.

Rule Application The vertical separation rule can best be shown by the following example. If United 965 is cruising overhead and has reported level
at 8,000 feet, American 121 could be cleared for takeoff with a clearance to
maintain 7,000 feet. In addition, SWA 877, cruising overhead at 15,000 feet,
could be cleared to descend as low as 9,000 feet (see Figure 7–6). In this example,
each aircraft is always separated from the others by at least 1,000 feet. If, however, 3 minutes after American 121 departs Continental 342 requests permission
to depart, the Continental flight cannot be assigned 6,000 feet. Even though the
two aircraft would be assigned different altitudes, the controller would not be
able to ensure that at any given moment both aircraft would be separated by at
least 1,000 feet. Since the precise altitude of American 121 is unknown, there
would be no way to ensure that Continental 342 would be at least 1,000 feet
lower. Until American 121’s altitude is determined, the Continental flight could
not be cleared to depart at all.
In this particular situation, the pilot of American 121 will not make any
altitude reports, since the controller has not requested any. The simplest method
of separating the two aircraft would be to request that the pilot of American
121 report leaving a series of intermediate altitudes and then to clear the Continental flight to maintain an altitude 1,000 feet below those altitudes.
Exceptions to the Basic Rule According to the FAA handbook, the only time
that the basic vertical separation rule may be relaxed is when both aircraft
involved are either climbing or descending. The handbook states that if both
aircraft are climbing, once the higher aircraft has reported leaving an assigned

288 / CHAPTER 7

15,000 ft.
SWA
877
9,000 ft.
8,000 ft.
United
965

7,000 ft.

American
121
Continental
342

Runway

Figure 7–6. Example of vertical separation. United 965 is level at 8,000 feet and is
separated from SWA 877, which is descending from 15,000 feet to 9,000 feet.
United 965 is also separated from American 121, which is climbing from the airport
to 7,000 feet. Since American 121’s altitude has not been confirmed, Continental 342
cannot depart.

altitude and is climbing to another altitude at least 1,000 feet higher, the lower
aircraft may be assigned the altitude the first aircraft has reported vacating.
The handbook also states that if both aircraft are descending, once the lower
aircraft has reported leaving an assigned altitude, the higher aircraft can be
assigned the altitude just vacated by the lower aircraft.
Using our example, if the pilot of American 121 is asked to report leaving
the altitudes between 2,000 and 6,000 feet, those altitudes can be immediately
assigned to Continental 342 as they are vacated. The phraseology for this type
of clearance is as follows:
CONTROLLER:

AMERICAN 121:

AMERICAN 121:
CONTROLLER:
CONTINENTAL 342:

American one twenty-one, climb and maintain seven thousand,
report leaving two thousand, three thousand, four thousand,
five thousand, and six thousand.
American one twenty-one, roger. Climb and maintain seven
thousand. We will report leaving two thousand, three
thousand, four thousand, five thousand, and six thousand.
American one twenty-one is leaving two thousand.
American one twenty-one, roger. Continental three forty-two,
climb and maintain two thousand.
Continental three forty-two, roger.

Nonradar En Route and Terminal Separation
AMERICAN 121:
CONTROLLER:
CONTINENTAL 342:
CONTROLLER:
AMERICAN 121:
CONTROLLER:
CONTINENTAL 342:
CONTROLLER:
AMERICAN 121:
CONTROLLER:
CONTINENTAL 342:
CONTROLLER:
AMERICAN 121:
CONTROLLER:
CONTINENTAL 342:
CONTROLLER:

/

289

American one twenty-one is leaving three thousand.
American one twenty-one, roger. Continental three forty-two,
climb and maintain three thousand.
Continental three forty-two is leaving two thousand for three
thousand.
Continental three forty-two, roger.
American one twenty-one is leaving four thousand.
American one twenty-one, roger. Continental three forty-two,
climb and maintain four thousand.
Continental three forty-two is leaving three thousand for four
thousand.
Continental three forty-two, roger.
American one twenty-one is leaving five thousand.
American one twenty-one, roger. Continental three forty-two,
climb and maintain five thousand.
Continental three forty-two is leaving four thousand for five
thousand.
Continental three forty-two, roger.
American one twenty-one is leaving six thousand.
American one twenty-one, roger. Continental three forty-two,
climb and maintain six thousand.
Continental three forty-two is leaving five thousand for six
thousand.
Continental three forty-two, roger.

This procedure is common in air traffic control and is known as stepping up an
aircraft. It can just as easily be applied to aircraft that are descending, in which
case it is known as stepping down an aircraft.
This exception to the basic vertical separation rule cannot be applied
whenever the aircraft are unable to maintain at least a 500-foot-per-minute
rate of climb or descent. The Aeronautical Information Manual states that the
pilot should inform the controller whenever this rate of change cannot be maintained. But the controller should also be cognizant of the performance characteristics of both aircraft. The basic premise for this rule exception is that both
aircraft will climb or descend at approximately the same rate, keeping at least
1,000 feet apart. If this separation interval is not likely to be maintained, this
exception to the basic rule should not be used. It would be potentially dangerous, for example, to try to step up a military fighter jet that is directly below a
small civilian training aircraft. If either pilot became careless, or if the altimeter
in either aircraft malfunctioned slightly, a midair collision might result.
The FAA handbook also precludes the use of this vertical separation rule
exception under the following conditions:
Whenever severe turbulence is being reported in the area, which might make it
impossible for either pilot to maintain a consistent climb or descent profile.
Whenever either of the aircraft is participating in military refueling maneuvers.

290 / CHAPTER 7
Whenever the preceding aircraft has been issued a clearance to climb or descend
at pilot’s discretion. A pilot’s discretion clearance does not obligate the pilot to
maintain at least a 500-foot-per-minute climb or descent.
Whenever the air traffic controller concludes that 1,000 feet of vertical
separation between the aircraft may not be maintained during the procedure.
The controller must make this judgment based on pilot reports and knowledge
of the aircraft involved. The controller should be wary of using this rule
exception whenever separating two aircraft that have widely different climb or
descent characteristics.

If any of these conditions exists, the second aircraft cannot be assigned the
altitude vacated by the first aircraft until the first reports being established at
or passing through an altitude at least 1,000 feet away from the altitude to be
assigned to the second aircraft.
Lateral
Separation

Because of their ease of use, vertical separation methods are usually applied to
aircraft operating along the same route or airway or within the immediate
vicinity of an airport. But exclusive use of vertical separation can result in
inefficient airspace usage and reduced traffic flows. Thus, controllers should
consider using alternative methods of separation whenever possible. One of the
methods that can be applied to aircraft operating on different routes is lateral
separation. Lateral separation presumes that both aircraft are on different
routes whose reserved airspaces do not overlap (see Figure 7–7). Two aircraft
that are separated laterally may operate at the same altitude.
Basic Lateral Separation Rule Two aircraft are considered to be separated
laterally whenever at least one of the following conditions exists:
The two aircraft are operating on different airways or routes whose protected
airspaces do not overlap. Since each airway is 8 nautical miles wide, to be
separated laterally two aircraft must be operating on different airways whose
centerlines are at least 8 nautical miles apart. This assumes that the aircraft are
within 51 miles of the navigation aid defining that airway. If the aircraft are
greater than 51 miles from the navigation aid, the airways diverge at 4.5°.
The aircraft are holding over different navigation fixes whose defined holdingpattern airspace does not overlap.

The airspace reserved for aircraft operating on airways is described in
FAR 71.5. In general, every airway is 8 nautical miles wide unless the changeover point is farther than 51 miles from the navaid. The width of the airway segment greater than 40 miles from the navaid is defined as that area between two
lines that diverge at an angle of 4.5°, centered on the airway centerline (see
Figure 7–8).
With lateral separation, each aircraft must be established on an airway
whose protected airspaces do not overlap. If this cannot be accomplished, one
of the other methods of separation (vertical, longitudinal, or visual) must be
used until the airways cease to overlap.

Nonradar En Route and Terminal Separation

/

291

United 911

V3

V4

Coyle

Width of
airway

03

0

Jones

065
090
OKC

V6

SWA 691

Boley

Figure 7–7. Example of lateral separation. United 911 is laterally separated from
SWA 691 since their protected airspaces no longer overlap. In addition, aircraft could
hold at the Coyle and Jones intersections simultaneously at the same altitude, since
their airspaces abut but do not overlap. Aircraft cannot hold simultaneously at the
same altitude at Boley and Jones, however, since their airspaces overlap.

It is fairly easy to determine whether lateral separation exists by using
navigation charts. If the controller determines that the two airways are at least
8 nautical miles apart, the two airways can be used simultaneously by aircraft
operating at the same altitude. If the airways are less than 8 miles apart, they
are not separated laterally. In most cases, if the airway boundaries begin to
diverge at 4.5°, the airway will have already been plotted and will be drawn on
the controller’s chart.
Exceptions to the Lateral Separation Rule In a few instances lateral separation can be applied to aircraft operating on airways that are not 8 nautical
miles apart. The FAA handbook states that lateral separation between two

292 / CHAPTER 7

Airway boundary
Changeover
point
VORTAC
4.5°

4 n mi
Airway centerline

4.5°

VORTAC
4.5°
4.5°

4 n mi

51 n mi
130 n mi
260 n mi

Figure 7–8. Example of airway width. A typical low-altitude airway is 8 nautical
miles wide until the airway segment is greater than 40 nautical miles from the VOR,
at which point the airway begins to diverge at a 4.5° angle. In this example, the
changeover point is equidistant between the two VORs.

aircraft can be considered to exist whenever both aircraft are established on
different radials of the same navigation aid and either aircraft is clear of the
airspace reserved for the other. The distance from the navaid that either aircraft must be to ensure that they are beyond the boundaries of each other’s
reserved airspace depends on the divergence angle of the two airways. This
distance determination can be made using Table 7–1 or Table 7–2 (from the
handbook). Table 7–1 is used whenever distance is being determined by pilots
using non-DME methods. Table 7–2 is used when the pilots are using DME
and takes into consideration slant range measurement error.
To properly use these tables, the controller must determine the angular
difference between the two airways. If this value is not found on the table, the
controller must use the next lowest angular value. The controller then uses the
applicable distance value from the table. Whenever either of the aircraft has
flown at least this distance, it is presumed to be clear of the airspace reserved
for the other, and lateral separation exists.
This method of lateral separation is best applied to two aircraft crossing
the same navigation fix, but that will then diverge, operating on different airways. Prior to crossing the fix, each aircraft must be separated by some method
other than lateral separation—most often vertical separation. Once one of the
aircraft has crossed the navaid and progressed the prescribed distance along the
airway, lateral separation exists and vertical separation may be discontinued.
For example, assume that Pan Am 415 is operating westbound on victor 251
and is still east of the VORTAC. Cessna 4152G is operating northbound on victor 171 and is still south of the VORTAC. In this situation, the controller would
be required to apply vertical separation, since the aircrafts’ paths will cross. Let

Nonradar En Route and Terminal Separation
Table 7–1.

Table 7–2.

/

293

Degree-Divergence for Non-DME-Equipped Aircraft
Divergence
in Degrees

Distance in
Nautical Miles

15

16

20

12

25

10

30

8

35

7

45

6

55

5

90

4

Degree-Divergence for DME-Equipped Aircraft
Divergence
in Degrees

Distance in Nautical Miles
(aircraft operating
below FL 180)

Distance in
Nautical Miles
(FL 180–FL 450)

15

17

18

20

13

15

25

11

13

30

09

11

35

08

11

45

07

11

55

06

11

90

05

11

us assume that Pan Am 415 has been assigned 6,000 feet and Cessna 4152G
has been assigned 7,000 feet. Once the aircraft cross the VORTAC, their respective airways will diverge by 43° (315° minus 272°). Since 43° of divergence is
not listed in the tables, the next lowest angle, 35°, must be used. If DME can
be used, the controller must request that one or both of the pilots report when
they are 8 DME from the VORTAC (see Figure 7–9).
Suppose that Pan Am 415 is the aircraft that will reach this point first.
Once the pilot makes this position report, the controller can discontinue the use
of vertical separation, since lateral separation now exists. If desired by either
the controller or the pilot, Pan Am 415 can now be assigned the same altitude
as the Cessna, 7,000 feet.
If DME is not being used to determine the aircraft’s location, the controller must use the value obtained from Table 7–1 to determine when lateral
separation exists. According to the table, 7 miles of distance is needed to ensure

294 / CHAPTER 7
V171
315∞

ary
nd
ou
yb
wa
Air

ary
nd
ou
yb
wa
Air

8 DME

Airway boundary

Pan Am 415
43∞
V251
272∞

8 DME

V251
VORTAC

Airway boundary

N4152G

V171

Figure 7–9. The airspace reserved for each aircraft overlaps until at least one of the
aircraft is 8 nautical miles from VORTAC. At that point, the airways no longer
overlap, and lateral separation can be presumed to exist.

lateral separation. The controller would consult the appropriate navigation
chart to locate the closest intersection on the airways that is at least 7 miles
from the VOR. Once the pilot reports crossing this intersection, vertical separation could be discontinued, since lateral separation exists.
Holding
Patterns

Holding patterns are used whenever insufficient airspace exists for an aircraft
to continue toward its destination. While within a holding pattern, an aircraft
is restricted to a fairly small area, making it relatively easy for the controller to
apply separation. Vertical separation may be applied by clearing aircraft to
operate either above or below other holding aircraft. Lateral separation may be

Nonradar En Route and Terminal Separation

/

295

applied by ensuring that the airspace reserved for the holding aircraft does not
overlap the airspace reserved for the other aircraft.
To properly apply lateral separation to an aircraft within a holding
pattern, the controller must determine the airspace that must be reserved for
that aircraft. This is accomplished quite easily, taking into account the following factors that may affect the aircraft’s performance within the holding
pattern:
Indicated airspeed of the holding aircraft.
Navigation aid and aircraft navigational system performance.
Effect of wind on the holding aircraft.
Distance between the navaid and the navigational fix being used for holding.
The altitude being used by the holding aircraft.

The speed of the aircraft is important because faster aircraft cover a greater
distance while turning. Because the inbound leg of a standard holding pattern
is 1 minute, faster aircraft will cover a greater distance in that time. The FAA
uses the maximum holding airspeeds in Table 7–3 when determining holdingpattern sizes. These airspeeds are described in detail in the Aeronautical Information Manual and in FAA Order 7130.3, “Holding-Pattern Criteria.”
The accuracy of both airborne and ground-based navigation systems must
also be considered when determining the holding-pattern size. As the possibility
of navigation error increases, so must the size of the protected airspace reserved
for each holding aircraft. The following worst-case errors are assumed when
determining holding-pattern sizes:
Ground-based navigation error: ⫾5°
Airborne navigation error: ⫾10°
Six-second delay between pilot recognition of holding fix passage and
commencing the turn outbound

Holding-pattern sizes are predicated on wind directions that would cause the
maximum deviation from the holding pattern. FAA specialists must assume that

Table 7–3.

Maximum Holding Airspeeds
Altitude Limits

Holding-Pattern Airspeed
(in knots of indicated airspeed) *

0–6,000 MSL

200

6,000–14,000 MSL

230

above 14,000 MSL

265

*In certain situations, holding-pattern airspeeds as low as 175 knots may be assigned to
smaller aircraft.

296 / CHAPTER 7
a strong crosswind exists at the holding-pattern altitude and that the aircraft
may be temporarily blown off-course. Holding-pattern sizes are also predicated
on wind velocities of 50 knots at 4,000 feet, which increase 3 knots for every
2,000 feet of altitude, with a maximum possible wind velocity of 120 knots.
After analyzing wind speeds across the United States, FAA procedures specialists have found that the winds aloft seldom exceed these values.
The effective size of any particular intersection is directly related to its
distance from the defining navigation aid. Thus, when deciding a holding-pattern size, the controller must also determine the holding fix distance from each
navigation aid and use that which is greater.
The altitude that the aircraft will be holding at also directly affects the
size of the holding pattern. An aircraft’s true airspeed increases as its altitude
increases. Because of the decrease in air density as altitude increases, a constant indicated airspeed will result in a faster true airspeed. As true airspeed
increases, so does the area used by the aircraft when holding.
Holding-Pattern Templates To simplify the controller’s task of separating aircraft in holding patterns, the FAA has developed a set of thirty-one standard
holding-pattern sizes, known as holding-pattern templates. A number 1 template defines the airspace used for the smallest holding pattern, whereas a number 31 defines the largest holding pattern. The proper holding-pattern template
can be selected for any aircraft by using the information contained in FAA Order
7130.3, “Holding Pattern Criteria.”
To choose the proper template, the controller must first determine the aircraft’s airspeed using Table 7–3. The controller must then select the appropriate
template using the Template Selection Charts in Tables 7–4 through 7–7.
To choose the proper template, the controller must ascertain the aircraft
airspeed, the maximum holding fix distance from the navaid, and the altitude
at which the aircraft will be operating. For example, the controller who wishes
to hold a Cessna 210 (which is a single-engine, propeller-driven personal aircraft) at the delta intersection at 6,000 feet should use the following method to
determine the proper holding-pattern template:
1. Determine the holding-pattern airspeed that will be used by the aircraft. (In this
example, assume a 175-knot maximum airspeed holding pattern is being used.)
2. Use the airspeed to determine which pattern selection chart to use. In this case,
Template Selection Chart I (Table 7-4) should be used, because it was expressly
designed for aircraft holding at or below 175 knots IAS.
3. Using a navigation chart, determine the holding fix distance from each
navigation aid. Use the largest distance of the two. In this hypothetical case, if
delta intersection is 10 DME from alpha VOR and 16 DME from bravo VOR,
16 nautical miles should be used.
4. Refer to the proper template selection chart and locate the aircraft’s altitude in
the appropriate column. In this example, the 15 to 29.9 nautical mile distance
column should be used.

Nonradar En Route and Terminal Separation
Table 7–4.

297

/

Template Selection Chart I, for Aircraft
Holding at or below 175 Knots IAS
Distance from
the Navaid
0–14.9 n mi

Distance from
the Navaid
15–29.9 n mi

Distance from
the Navaid
30 n mi and over

Altitude

Template

Altitude

Template

Altitude

Template

02,000

1

2,000

1

2,000

2

04,000

1

4,000

2

4,000

3

06,000

2

6,000

3

6,000

4

08,000

3

8,000

4

8,000

5

10,000

4

10,000

5

10,000

6

12,000

5

12,000

6

12,000

7

14,000

6

14,000

7

14,000

8

16,000

7

16,000

8

16,000

9

18,000

8

18,000

9

18,000

10

20,000

8

20,000

9

20,000

10

22,000

9

22,000

10

22,000

11

24,000

10

24,000

11

24,000

12

26,000

11

26,000

12

26,000

13

28,000

12

28,000

13

28,000

14

30,000

13

30,000

14

30,000

15

5. Note the template number that should be used. In this example, a number 3
template is specified.

To properly use the template, the controller must:
1. Determine whether a right- or a left-turn holding pattern will be used. The
templates are designed for use with a right-turn holding pattern. If a left turn is
desired, the controller must physically turn the template over when tracing the
holding pattern.
2. Place the small hole in the template directly over the holding fix. The line
extending from the small hole is laid directly over the inbound course to the
holding fix.
3. Trace around the holding-pattern template to delineate the airspace reserved for
that aircraft. To laterally separate this aircraft, the controller must ensure that
this airspace does not overlap that reserved for any other aircraft operating at
the same altitude.

A number of factors can be considered to reduce the size of the holding-pattern
airspace. One is the aircraft’s type of holding-pattern entry and its position

298 / CHAPTER 7
Table 7–5.

Template Selection Chart II, for Aircraft
Holding between 175 and 230 Knots IAS
Distance from
the Navaid
0–14.9 n mi

Distance from
the Navaid
15–29.9 n mi

Distance from
the Navaid
30 n mi and over

Altitude

Template

Altitude

Template

Altitude

Template

02,000

3

2,000

4

2,000

5

04,000

4

4,000

5

4,000

6

06,000

5

6,000

6

6,000

7

08,000

6

8,000

7

8,000

8

10,000

7

10,000

8

10,000

9

12,000

7

12,000

8

12,000

9

14,000

8

14,000

9

14,000

10

16,000

12

16,000

13

16,000

14

18,000

13

18,000

14

18,000

15

20,000

14

20,000

15

20,000

16

22,000

15

22,000

16

22,000

17

24,000

16

24,000

17

24,000

18

26,000

17

26,000

18

26,000

19

28,000

18

28,000

19

28,000

20

30,000

19

30,000

20

30,000

21

32,000

20

32,000

21

32,000

22

34,000

21

34,000

22

34,000

23

36,000

22

36,000

23

36,000

24

38,000

23

38,000

24

38,000

25

40,000

24

40,000

25

40,000

26

42,000

25

42,000

26

42,000

27

44,000

26

44,000

27

44,000

28

46,000

27

46,000

28

46,000

29

48,000

28

48,000

29

48,000

30

50,000

28

50,000

29

50,000

30

within the holding pattern. Whenever an aircraft enters a holding pattern from
a direction other than the inbound course, additional airspace is reserved to
permit the aircraft to become established on the inbound course. Normal
application of the holding-pattern template takes this additional airspace into
consideration. Once the aircraft is established on the inbound course, this
extra maneuvering space can be eliminated, thereby reducing the size of the
holding-pattern airspace. The dashed line, known as the fix end reduction area,

Nonradar En Route and Terminal Separation
Table 7–6.

299

/

Template Selection Chart III, for Aircraft
Holding at 265 Knots IAS
Distance from
the Navaid
0–14.9 n mi

Distance from
the Navaid
15–29.9 n mi

Distance from
the Navaid
30 n mi and over

Altitude

Template

Altitude

Template

Altitude

02,000

7

2,000

8

2,000

9

04,000

8

4,000

9

4,000

10

06,000

9

6,000

10

6,000

11

08,000

10

8,000

11

8,000

12

10,000

11

10,000

12

10,000

13

12,000

12

12,000

13

12,000

14

14,000

13

14,000

14

14,000

15

16,000

15

16,000

16

16,000

17

18,000

16

18,000

17

18,000

18

20,000

17

20,000

18

20,000

19

22,000

18

22,000

19

22,000

20

24,000

19

24,000

20

24,000

21

26,000

20

26,000

21

26,000

22

28,000

21

28,000

22

28,000

23

30,000

22

30,000

23

30,000

24

32,000

23

32,000

24

32,000

25

34,000

24

34,000

25

34,000

26

36,000

25

36,000

26

36,000

27

38,000

26

38,000

27

38,000

28

40,000

27

40,000

28

40,000

29

42,000

28

42,000

29

42,000

30

44,000

28

44,000

29

44,000

30

46,000

29

46,000

30

46,000

31

48,000

31

Template

delineates this airspace (see Figure 7–10). If the aircraft is initially established on
the inbound course, or once the pilot reports being established on the inbound
course, this area is no longer reserved for the aircraft. A number of additional
holding-pattern reduction areas are located on the outbound end of the holdingpattern template. Use of these reduction areas is infrequent; the proper means of
applying these reductions can be obtained from FAA Order 7130.3.
Holding-Pattern Applications This entire procedure seems too cumbersome
and too complex for controllers to perform on a routine basis. And, it is. In

300 / CHAPTER 7
Table 7–7.

Template Selection Chart IV, for Aircraft
Holding at or below 310 Knots IAS
Distance from
the Navaid
0–14.9 n mi

Distance from
the Navaid
15–29.9 n mi

Distance from
the Navaid
30 n mi and over

Altitude

Template

Altitude

Template

Altitude

Template

02,000

11

2,000

12

2,000

13

04,000

12

4,000

13

4,000

14

06,000

13

6,000

14

6,000

15

08,000

14

8,000

15

8,000

16

10,000

15

10,000

16

10,000

17

12,000

17

12,000

18

12,000

19

14,000

18

14,000

19

14,000

20

16,000

19

16,000

20

16,000

21

18,000

20

18,000

21

18,000

22

20,000

21

20,000

22

20,000

23

22,000

22

22,000

23

22,000

24

24,000

22

24,000

23

24,000

24

26,000

24

26,000

25

26,000

26

28,000

24

28,000

25

28,000

26

30,000

25

30,000

26

30,000

27

32,000

26

32,000

27

32,000

28

34,000

27

34,000

28

34,000

29

36,000

28

36,000

29

36,000

30

38,000

29

38,000

30

38,000

31

40,000

30

40,000

31

most cases, this process need not be done on a day-to-day basis. Most air traffic
control facilities have developed a chart of the local airspace, with every conceivable holding pattern traced on it. Any overlap of holding pattern or airway
airspace is noted and prominently displayed (see Figure 7–11). All a controller
must do to routinely issue holding instructions is to glance at the chart and
determine whether any lateral conflicts exist. If none do, the holding pattern
may be safely occupied. In most cases, the only time that the entire holdingpattern procedure must be applied is when an unusual situation occurs or when
a particular air traffic control facility’s airspace is being modified.
Longitudinal
Separation

Whenever two aircraft are flying along the same route, either vertical or longitudinal separation methods must be used. Vertical separation is the easier
method, but it may also result in an inefficient use of the airspace. This may be

Nonradar En Route and Terminal Separation

Fix end
reduction area

/

301

1 2 3 4

Outbound end
reduction areas

Holding fix

Inbound leg

Fix end
reduction area

Figure 7–10. A drawing of a holding-pattern template (number 29) showing the
locations of the holding fix, the fix end reduction area, and the outbound end
reduction areas.

of less concern to controllers in a terminal environment but can greatly reduce
the amount of traffic that can operate on highly traveled airways within certain
ARTCCs or on transoceanic routes. In these cases, it would be more efficient to
clear multiple aircraft to operate along these airways at the same altitude, using
longitudinal separation techniques. Longitudinal separation may also be used
when two aircraft are operating at different altitudes along the same route but
one is changing altitude and must pass through the altitude being used by the
other.
Longitudinal separation presumes that both aircraft are operating along
the same route or are on routes whose protected airspaces overlap one another
(see Figure 7–12). Routes whose protected airspaces overlap (the centerlines
of the airways are less than 8 nautical miles apart) are considered for separation purposes to be the same route. For longitudinal separation to be applied
to two aircraft, both must be flying at or near the same airspeed or the leading
aircraft must be significantly faster than the following aircraft. Situations in
which the following aircraft is faster than the leading aircraft usually make
it impossible to apply longitudinal separation. If the following aircraft were
indeed faster, it would eventually overtake the leading aircraft, thereby incurring a loss of separation.
Longitudinal separation can also be applied to aircraft operating along
the same route but in opposite directions. This procedure is fairly complex and

302 / CHAPTER 7

Figure 7–11. An example of various holding patterns plotted on a chart and used by the controllers in the
Lafayette, Indiana, airspace.

Nonradar En Route and Terminal Separation

B

/

303

A

N1347P

N39H

Figure 7–12. Longitudinal separation can be applied between two aircraft on the same
route when the leading aircraft is either faster or operating at the same speed as the
following aircraft. As the speed differential increases, the separation interval can be
decreased.

requires a significant amount of airspace. Thus, terminal controllers will almost
never use this method of separation for opposite-direction traffic operating
along the same airway.
Longitudinal separation between two aircraft is applied using one of the
following methods:
1. Aircraft operating in the same direction.
a. If the leading aircraft is flying at a true airspeed at least 44 knots faster than
that of the following aircraft, at least a 3-minute (or 5-nautical-mile as
measured by DME or RNAV) interval of separation must be maintained
between the two aircraft (see Figure 7–13).
b. If the leading aircraft will fly at a true airspeed at least 22 knots faster than
that of the following aircraft, at least a 5-minute (or 10-nautical-mile as
measured by DME or RNAV) interval of separation must be maintained
between the two aircraft (see Figure 7–14).
c. If either of the aircraft is climbing or descending through the altitude of the
other aircraft, at least a 5-minute (or 10-nautical-mile) interval of separation
must be maintained. This procedure may be applied only when either the leading
aircraft is descending or the following aircraft is climbing (see Figure 7–15).
d. If none of the above conditions can be met, both aircraft must be separated by at
least a 10-minute or a 20-nautical-mile interval of separation (see Figure 7–16).

304 / CHAPTER 7

3 min.

5 n mi

Figure 7–13. If the leading aircraft is at least 44 knots faster than the following aircraft,
either a 3-minute or a 5-nautical-mile longitudinal separation interval must be used.

5 min.

10 n mi

Figure 7–14. If the leading aircraft is at least 22 knots faster than the following
aircraft, either a 5-minute or a 10-nautical-mile longitudinal separation interval must
be used.

2. Aircraft operating in opposite directions.
Aircraft operating along the same route but in opposite directions must be
separated vertically from at least 10 minutes prior to and until at least
10 minutes after they are estimated to pass each other. This vertical separation
can be discontinued prematurely, and longitudinal separation can be applied if:
a. Both aircraft have passed the same navaid or DME fix, or
b. Both aircraft have reported passing the same intersection and are now at
least 3 minutes apart. This 3-minute interval is used to take into
consideration the maximum airborne navigational equipment error.

Nonradar En Route and Terminal Separation

/

305

9,000

7,000
10 n mi
5,000

9,000

7,000
10 n mi
5,000

Figure 7–15. If the leading aircraft is descending or the following aircraft is climbing, a
10-nautical-mile longitudinal separation interval must be used.

If none of these separation criteria can be met, the controller is not permitted
to use longitudinal separation and must apply vertical, lateral, or visual separation methods.
Longitudinal separation is usually more efficient than the strict use of vertical separation for busy and congested airways. If, for example, there is only
one airway between two airports, the use of vertical separation could severely
restrict the number of aircraft operating along that airway. Once a sufficient
number of aircraft have departed to use every available altitude, no other aircraft could use the airway. And if the controller had inadvertently permitted a
relatively slow and low-flying aircraft to be the first departure, it might prove
to be impossible to clear any subsequent aircraft to depart, since there would
be no available lower altitudes. In such cases, the controller usually finds it
advantageous to use longitudinal separation, permitting a number of aircraft
to operate along the same route at the same altitude.
Longitudinal separation of aircraft is accomplished by requiring the pilot
to do one of the following:
Depart an airport or a navigational fix at a specified time.
Depart an airport or a navigational fix after the preceding aircraft has traveled a
specified distance.

306 / CHAPTER 7

10 min.

Navaid

20 n mi

10 min.

20 n mi

Figure 7–16. If the leading aircraft is operating on the airway at the same speed
as the following aircraft or is crossing the airway, a 10-minute or a 20-nautical-mile
longitudinal separation interval must be used.

Arrive at a navigational fix at a specified time.
Cross a navigational fix at a specified time.
Enter a holding pattern at a fix until the preceding aircraft has traveled a
specified time or distance.
Change altitude at a navigational fix.

At the time that the particular clearance is issued, the controller will write
the appropriate information in designated sections of the flight progress strip.
Most of this information is written in field 9 on a terminal flight progress strip
and field 25 on a flight strip used by center controllers. In most cases, fields
10 through 18 on a terminal flight strip are also used to record some of this
information.
Whenever the pilot makes a required report to the controller, this information is noted on the flight progress strip. In a similar to that with which
method altitude reports are recorded, the controller will usually line out the
written request on the flight strip when the position report is made. In most
cases, the time that the report was made will also be recorded. Since many of
the longitudinal separation procedures rely on time interval separation, time
reports must be accurately recorded.

Nonradar En Route and Terminal Separation

/

307

Whenever the controller requests that the pilot report crossing a particular fix, the letters RX, followed by the name of the fix, are placed on the flight
progress strip. If the controller clears the pilot to cross a navigational fix at a
specified time the controller writes “X @ (time)” on the flight strip. The time is
always specified in UTC. The pilot may also be requested to cross the fix before
a specified time or after a specified time. The ⬎ symbol is used to indicate
before, whereas the ⬍ symbol indicates after. The pilot may also be requested
to maintain a certain altitude until a specified time or position is reached. This
is indicated using the / symbol.
If it is necessary to hold an aircraft, the controller issues the holding instructions to the pilot and places the letter H on the flight strip, followed by the
specific holding instructions. The controller may also request the pilot to depart
a fix or an airport at a specified time, which is indicated using the letter T.
One of the simplest applications of longitudinal separation is in separating two aircraft departing from the same airport when both pilots wish to fly
the same route at the same altitude. If both aircraft will fly at the same true
airspeed, the controller will clear one aircraft to depart and will then wait at
least 10 minutes before clearing the following aircraft to depart. As long as
the leading aircraft will operate at the same speed or faster than the following
aircraft, this procedure ensures that there will always be at least a 10-minute
interval of separation between the two aircraft.
If both aircraft can determine distance along the airway using DME, the
controller may find it operationally advantageous to use a 20-nautical-mile
interval of separation. In this case, the controller asks the pilot of the leading
aircraft to report when the aircraft is 20 nautical miles from the airport. At that
point, the following aircraft can be released.
The separation interval can be reduced if the leading aircraft is at least
22 knots faster than the following aircraft, in which case the controller is
required to separate the aircraft by either a 5-minute or a 10-nautical-mile
interval. If the leading aircraft is at least 44 knots faster than the following, the
separation interval can be reduced to 3 minutes or 5 nautical miles.
But what if the leading aircraft is slower than the following aircraft? In
this case, it is virtually impossible to use longitudinal separation, as there is no
way to ensure at least a 10-minute interval of separation between the aircraft
at all times. Even if the controller waits 15 to 20 minutes after the first aircraft leaves before departing the following aircraft, there is no assurance that
both aircraft will always maintain at least a 10-minute separation interval.
Eventually, the second aircraft will overtake the first. Once they are less than
10 minutes or 20 miles from each other, a loss of separation will have occurred.
Therefore, it is obvious that it is in the controller’s, and the pilot’s, best interest
that faster aircraft be permitted to depart prior to slower aircraft. Even if the
slower aircraft is ready to depart earlier, insofar as ATC system efficiency is
concerned, it is more efficient to hold the slower aircraft for a short time than
to be unable to release the faster aircraft.
Another situation in which it might be more efficient to use longitudinal
separation is when the first aircraft is airborne, flying over the airport, while

308 / CHAPTER 7
the second is still on the ground but wishing to depart and use the same airway.
If there is a navigation fix directly above the airport, it can be used to effect
longitudinal separation. If, for instance, the airborne aircraft is at least 44 knots
faster than the aircraft on the ground, the controller need only ensure that the
second aircraft does not depart until at least 3 minutes after the first aircraft
crossed the navigation aid.
Another application of longitudinal separation is in the use of crossing
restrictions. If two aircraft were initially on different routes (separated laterally) but are both eventually going to operate along the same route, the faster
aircraft might be allowed to operate unrestricted, with the slower aircraft
instructed to join the airway at a later time. For example, let us assume that
the first aircraft is at least 22 knots faster than the second aircraft, and the second aircraft is in a holding pattern laterally separated from the airway. If the
first aircraft reports crossing the VOR at 30 minutes past the hour, the second aircraft could be authorized to depart the holding pattern and to cross the
VOR at or after 35 minutes past the hour. This procedure would ensure that at
least a 5-minute separation interval is maintained.
Initial
Separation of
Aircraft

The three methods of separation mentioned thus far, vertical, lateral, and longitudinal, are difficult to apply to aircraft that have just departed an airport or
to separation of an arriving and a departing aircraft, because the aircraft’s positions and altitudes are most likely changing constantly. Thus, the FAA has
developed procedures to initially separate aircraft. Initial separation procedures
are used only to separate aircraft that are beginning or ending their flight and
are within the immediate vicinity of an airport. Since the location of each aircraft can be accurately determined, separation intervals can be temporarily
reduced.
These procedures presume that both aircraft are operating from the same
airport. Once initial separation methods have been used and the aircraft are
established on their respective courses, any of the previously mentioned separation methods must be applied. The use of initial separation procedures does
not permit the controller to use procedures that might place either aircraft in
an unsafe situation. These rules must, therefore, be used with discretion, taking
into consideration aircraft performance and the local air traffic structure.
Initial Separation of Arriving and Departing Aircraft When separating an
arrival aircraft from a departure at the same airport, the controller must first
determine whether the course of the departing aircraft will diverge from that
of the inbound aircraft. Divergence occurs whenever the course of one aircraft
differs from the other by at least 45°. If the courses differ by less than this angle,
they do not diverge, and the controller must presume that for all practical purposes the aircraft will be operating on the same route.
If the departing aircraft is taking off in a direction headed toward an
inbound aircraft, the controller may consider the two aircraft to be separated
as long as at least one of the following conditions exists:

Nonradar En Route and Terminal Separation

/

309

45°
Depart
this area
45°

3 min.

Figure 7–17. A 3-minute separation interval must be applied between an arriving and
a departing aircraft with courses that will immediately diverge by at least 45°.

The departing aircraft must be established on a course that differs by at least
45° from the reciprocal of the final approach course before the inbound aircraft
reaches a fix located at least 4 nautical miles from the end of the runway. If no
such fix exists, the aircraft must depart at least 3 minutes before the inbound
aircraft’s estimated time of arrival at the airport (see Figure 7–17).
If the departing aircraft’s initial heading does not differ from the reciprocal of
the final approach course by at least 45°, the departing aircraft may depart only
if it is established on a course that diverges at least 45° from the reciprocal of
the inbound course, at least 5 minutes before the inbound aircraft’s estimated
time of arrival (see Figure 7–18), or at least 5 minutes before the arrival aircraft
begins the procedure turn (see Figure 7–19).

Initial Separation of Successive Departing Aircraft When two aircraft are
departing from the same airport and their eventual courses will diverge by at
least 45°, the controller may use the same-runway, different-runway, or intersecting-runway separation techniques, described in the following section, until
one of the standard methods of separation (vertical, lateral, or longitudinal)
can be applied. The controller must take into consideration both the aircraft’s
and the pilot’s performance capabilities before using these procedures.

310 / CHAPTER 7

Take off
any direction

45°

45°

5 min.

Figure 7–18. A 5-minute separation interval must be applied between an arriving and
a departing aircraft with courses that will eventually diverge by at least 45°.

45°

Take off
any direction

45°

Until starting
procedure turn

Figure 7–19. A departing aircraft is separated from an arrival if it is established on a
diverging course before the arriving aircraft begins the procedure turn.

Nonradar En Route and Terminal Separation

/

311

in.

1m

Figure 7–20. Two departing aircraft with courses that will diverge immediately after
takeoff can be separated by a 1-minute interval.

Same-Runway Separation If two aircraft are departing from the same runway
or from parallel runways separated by less than 3,500 feet, they can be considered to be separated if one of the following criteria can be met (see Figures 7–20
through 7–22):
1. If the two aircraft will fly diverging courses immediately after takeoff, the
aircraft must be separated by at least a 1-minute interval.
2. If the two aircraft will not diverge immediately, but will diverge within 5
minutes after departure, they must be separated by at least a 2-minute interval.
3. If the two aircraft will diverge within 13 nautical miles of the departure airport,
they must be separated by at least a 3-nautical-mile interval.

Although seemingly straightforward, these rules are not as easy to apply in
practice as it might first appear. For instance, using criterion number one, it
would seem that if both aircraft were going to diverge immediately after takeoff, the second aircraft could be cleared for takeoff 1 minute after the first has
departed. But note that rule number one specifies that the controller must ensure
that at least a 1-minute continuous separation interval exists between both
aircraft until their courses diverge. For example, assume that two aircraft
wish to depart from the same airport using runway 27. The first aircraft is a
Piper Cherokee whose heading will be 315° and whose true airspeed is about

312 / CHAPTER 7

2 min.

5 min.

Figure 7–21. Two departing aircraft with courses that will diverge within 5 minutes
after takeoff can be separated by a 2-minute interval.

3 n mi

Within 13 n mi

Figure 7–22. Two departing aircraft with courses that will diverge within 13 nautical
miles can be separated by a 3-nautical-mile interval.

100 knots. Assume that the second aircraft is a Lear whose heading will be 270°
with a true airspeed of 250 knots (see Figure 7–23). If the controller waits 1 minute after the Cherokee departs before clearing the Lear for takeoff, a 1-minute
separation interval will not be maintained. If the Cherokee pilot delays turning
right for a few extra seconds, and considering that the Lear will probably make
a fairly wide left turn, it is almost a foregone conclusion that a continuous

Nonradar En Route and Terminal Separation

/

313

Cherokee

1 minute

27

315

270
Lear

Figure 7–23. A following aircraft may not remain properly separated if it is much
faster than the preceding aircraft.

1-minute interval of separation will not be maintained between the two
aircraft.
In this case, a very dangerous situation would soon develop. A safer
method of separating these two aircraft might be for the controller to request
that the Cherokee pilot report when the aircraft is established on the 315°
heading, wait for 1 minute, and then clear the Lear for takeoff. This situation
could also be more safely handled if the controller cleared the Lear for takeoff
first, followed by the Cherokee 1 minute later. In this case, because the Lear is
significantly faster than the Cherokee, a continuous 1-minute interval of separation is virtually guaranteed.
Suppose the Cherokee were turning left to a heading of 135° after takeoff,
with the Lear turning left to a heading of 180°. In this case, the two aircraft
would not diverge immediately after departure but would most likely diverge
within 5 minutes. So the controller assumes that rule number two can be safely
used. Again, if the two aircraft in question are vastly different in size and capability, this may not be the case (see Figure 7–24).
Different-Runway Separation If two aircraft are departing from parallel runways separated by at least 3,500 feet, the controller may authorize simultaneous departures if the aircrafts’ courses diverge by at least 45° immediately after
takeoff. The controller must ensure separation between these departures and
from succeeding departures. If two aircraft departing from parallel runways
will not diverge immediately after takeoff, the controller must act as if both
aircraft were departing from the same runway and use the separation rules
stated above that govern these situations.

314 / CHAPTER 7

Lear

27

180°

Turning left to 150°
Cherokee

Figure 7–24. Controllers must take into consideration aircraft performance
characteristics when separating aircraft.

If the two aircraft will depart from nonparallel runways, one of the following conditions must exist or the controller must act as if the aircraft were
departing from the same runway:
The runways diverge by at least 30° and the aircrafts' courses immediately
diverge by at least 45°.
The runways diverge at less than 30° but by at least 15°, the runways are
separated by at least 2,000 feet, and the aircraft will diverge by at least 45°
immediately after takeoff.
The runways diverge by less than 15° and are separated by at least 3,000 feet,
and both aircraft will diverge immediately after takeoff.

Intersecting-Runway Separation If the two departing aircraft will use intersecting runways for departure, authorize the departure of the controller may
these two aircraft if either of the following conditions exists:
The runways diverge by at least 30°, the preceding aircraft has passed the
intersection, and the aircraft will diverge by at least 45° immediately after
takeoff.
The runways diverge at less than 30° but by at least 15°, the preceding aircraft
has crossed the intersection and has commenced the turn on course, and the two
aircraft will diverge by at least 45° immediately after takeoff.

As in the previous examples, if neither of these conditions can be met, the controller must act as if the two aircraft were departing from the same runway.
These rules were designed to be as flexible as possible and to improve
efficiency within the immediate vicinity of the airport. If the controller does

Nonradar En Route and Terminal Separation

/

315

not find them helpful, he or she can use one of the standard methods of separation. A good, resourceful controller can usually find some way clear aircraft for
departure with a minimum of delay while still using the airspace efficiently.
Visual
Separation

One of the most flexible means of separating aircraft is through visual separation techniques. In general, visual separation requires that either of the pilots
sees the other aircraft and will provide the required separation or that the controller is able to observe both aircraft and assume the responsibility for providing safe separation. It is obvious from the examples included in this chapter
that the application of nonradar separation rules usually results in the inefficient use of airspace and can incur substantial delays to aircraft, both airborne
and on the ground. If visual separation can reduce these delays without degrading safety, it is in both the controller’s and the pilot’s best interest to use this
technique.
Visual separation is most often applied by terminal controllers. Because
of their large areas of responsibility and the fact that ARTCC controllers usually rely exclusively on radar separation, en route controllers seldom use visual
separation. One of the few instances in which visual separation is used by center controllers is in conjunction with visual approaches to airports not served
by an approach control facility.
The controller may use visual separation as long as radio contact is maintained with at least one of the aircraft involved and at least one of the following
conditions can be met:
The controller can visually identify both aircraft and is willing and able to
provide separation.
The pilot of at least one of the aircraft can visually identify the other aircraft
and has accepted responsibility for separation, and the pilot of the second
aircraft has been informed that visual separation is being applied. If at any time
the pilot of the first aircraft advises the controller that visual separation can
no longer be maintained, either the second pilot or the controller must accept
visual separation responsibility, or the controller must provide another method
of separation.

The pilots need not be informed that visual separation is in use if the controller accepts the responsibility for that separation. But, if one of the pilots is
accepting the responsibility, this fact must be made quite clear. The typical
phraseology used by controllers is provided in the following example involving two aircraft inbound for the same runway. United 324 (UAL 324), the first
aircraft, is conducting an ILS approach. The second aircraft, Delta 111 (DAL
111), is holding 1,000 feet above the United flight and is waiting to conduct an
ILS approach. Since DAL 111 will not be able to begin the approach until UAL
324 has landed, DAL 111 will be required to enter a holding pattern.
To properly use visual separation, the controller must ensure that the
pilot of DAL 111 has observed UAL 324. Once positive identification is established, the controller must request that the pilot of DAL 111 maintain visual

316 / CHAPTER 7
separation, advise the pilot of UAL 324 that visual separation is being used,
and receive acknowledgments from both pilots. If any of these criteria cannot
be met, visual separation may not be used.
CONTROLLER:
UNITED 324:
CONTROLLER:

DELTA 111:
CONTROLLER:
DELTA 111:
CONTROLLER:
UNITED 324:

United three twenty-four cleared for the ILS runway one zero
approach.
United three twenty-four, roger.
Delta one eleven, traffic is a United seven twenty-seven ahead of
you at two thousand, conducting the ILS approach, do you have it
in sight?
Delta one eleven. We have the seven twenty-seven in sight.
Delta one eleven, maintain visual separation from the seven twentyseven, cleared for the ILS one zero approach.
Delta one eleven, roger.
United three twenty-four, traffic is a DC-9 2 miles behind you on
the ILS maintaining visual separation.
United three twenty-four, roger.

When the Delta pilot accepted the clearance, he accepted responsibility for the
separation of the two aircraft. The controller still needed to apply standard
separation between these aircraft and any other IFR aircraft within the facility’s
airspace. If the Delta pilot had declined to accept the responsibility, the controller could not have used visual separation and would have had to use some other
separation technique.
Although visual separation usually provides increased ATC system efficiency, it has some serious shortcomings of which both controllers and pilots
should be aware. For instance, both the controller and the pilot must be certain
that the other aircraft is identified correctly. In highly congested areas where
many similar types of aircraft are inbound to the airport, a misidentification
is a distinct possibility. Both the controller and the pilot must also ensure that
visual separation can properly be maintained during the entire approach. Even
if the pilot is initially able to provide visual separation, distractions can make it
difficult for the pilot to maintain that separation. Controllers must realize that
pilots are usually very busy during the arrival and departure phases of flight.
To ask them to provide separation at this time may be a mistake if they are
involved in other, more crucial tasks. In particular, pilots of small civilian and
most military fighter aircraft are often just too busy navigating and operating
aircraft systems to be able to effectively maintain visual separation.
It is up to the pilot to decline visual separation responsibility whenever, in
his or her opinion, it might be unsafe to accept it. The controller should realize
that it may be difficult for pilots to maintain visual contact with other aircraft
in hazy or foggy weather or when headed directly into the sun. The controller
should also be aware that under certain conditions it may be physically impossible for the pilot to remain in visual contact with the other aircraft, such as
when one aircraft is directly under another. High-wing aircraft tend to block
the pilot’s view directly above and to one side while turning, whereas low-wing
aircraft block the pilot’s view directly below and to the other side when turning.

Nonradar En Route and Terminal Separation

/

317

Because of the cockpit window design, most aircraft have limited visibility in
the area directly below and behind the cockpit.
Even though it is the pilot’s responsibility to maintain visual separation
once the clearance has been accepted, it is the controller’s moral responsibility
to use this method of separation only when there is a reasonably good chance
that the pilot will be able to maintain visual contact with the other aircraft.
If a pilot feels that visual separation is not practical, he or she should
decline the clearance. A clearance is never effective until the pilot accepts it.
The mere issuance of a visual separation clearance does not make it so. The
controller must also be prepared to apply nonvisual separation techniques at
a moment’s notice. If, during a visual separation procedure, the pilot declares
that visual separation cannot be maintained, either the controller or the pilot
of the other aircraft must be able to provide the required visual separation or a
nonvisual separation technique must be immediately employed.

KEY TERMS
divergence
fix end reduction area
holding-pattern templates
indicated airspeed
initial separation procedures
lateral separation
longitudinal separation

maximum holding airspeeds
remote communication air/
ground (RCAG)
report crossing (RX)
report leaving (RL)
report reaching (RR)
separation error

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. What are the four different methods of nonradar separation?
2. What is the purpose of a holding pattern?
3. How does the controller know the location of each aircraft?
4. Who can be responsible for visual separation?
5. What variables affect the size of a holding pattern?

stepping down
stepping up
true airspeed
vertical separation
visual separation

8
Theory and Fundamentals
of Radar Operation
Checkpoints
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Describe the operation of a radar system.
2. Explain the need for and the operation of moving target indicator/detection
equipment.
3. Explain the need for and the operation of circular polarization equipment.
4. Describe the differences between primary and secondary radar.
5. Describe the major components and the operation of the air trafﬁc control radar
beacon system.
6. Identify and distinguish between the different modes used by the ATCRBS
system.
7. Explain the differences among STARS, ARTS-II, ARTS-III, NAS-A, DARC, and
EARTS.
8. Explain the difference between analog and digital radar.

Theory and Fundamentals of Radar Operation

319

History of Radar
Air traffic controllers use radar, which is similar to broadcast radio, to detect
and track aircraft. An acronym for Radio Detection and Ranging, radar is
not a new development but an improvement of concepts that date back to the
late nineteenth century. In 1888, the German physicist Heinrich Hertz demonstrated that radio waves were reflected by objects in the same manner as light
waves. In 1904, the German engineer Christian Hulsmeyer was granted a patent on a collision prevention device that used reflected radio waves. In 1917,
Nikola Tesla predicted that radio waves would eventually be used to detect
solid objects such as ships. In 1922, the Institute of Radio Engineers honored
Guglielmo Marconi for proving that these concepts were possible.
In that same year, just 3 months after Marconi was honored, two research
engineers at the Naval Research Laboratory in Anacostia, Maryland, provided
proof that these theoretical concepts could be of practical use. The two researchers, A. Hoyt Taylor and his assistant, Leo C. Young, noticed that ships traveling
on the Potomac River between an experimental radio transmitter and receiver
both blocked and reflected the radio transmissions, as shown in Figure 8–1.
Later that year, the two researchers recommended that the U.S. Navy continue
this research and concentrate on developing a system to detect hostile naval
vessels and attacking aircraft.
The Navy’s Bureau of Engineering continued this research, attempting to
perfect a system of determining the location of objects using blocked or reflected
radio energy. Protecting naval convoys was one of the first demonstrated uses
for this new system. Properly equipped escort vessels could blanket the perimeter of a convoy with high-powered radio transmissions that were directed from
one ship to the next. Every escort ship was also equipped with a sensitive radio

Transmitted
signal

Reflected
signal

Transmitter

Figure 8–1. Radar operates by transmitting a high-powered radio pulse and “listening”
for its reflection. Solid objects both reflect and block radar transmissions.

320 / CHAPTER 8
receiver, which was constantly monitored to detect any change or distortion of
the transmitted signal. Any disturbance of the radiated energy signified that an
unidentified vessel had just passed between two of the escorts.
Another primitive radar system used radio reflections to locate unidentified vessels. The Navy used this system to determine the relative position of
enemy vessels that were still a significant distance from the naval convoy. One
or more of the escort vessels were equipped with a directional radio transmitter, which had an antenna capable of being manually rotated 360° in azimuth and a directional receiver, with an antenna that rotated synchronously
with the transmitter's antenna. The radar operator, equipped with a radar display similar to an oscilloscope, observed the radar indicator as both antennas
were rotated. When the transmitter’s signal was reflected by a solid object,
such as another ship, an electronic pip appeared on the indicator. Then, the
radar operator observed the relative position of the antennas to determine the
unidentified vessel’s bearing from the ship. If more than one escort vessel was
able to locate the unidentified vessel using its radar, triangulation could determine the unidentified vessel’s exact location.
Since the transmitters operated continuously, this type of radar was known
as continuous wave (CW) radar. One significant disadvantage of CW radar is
that only the reflecting object’s bearing, or azimuth, can be determined. A different type of radar system is needed to determine the object’s distance, or range.

Development of Pulse Radar
During the early 1920s, Gregory Briet and Merle A. Tuve, of the Carnegie
Institute of Washington, perfected a primitive radar system that used short
radar pulses instead of the continuous transmissions used by Taylor and
Young. The Carnegie radar system was designed to transmit these short
pulses of radio energy straight up into the atmosphere, where they would be
reflected by the ionosphere. By measuring the elapsed time between the pulse
transmission and reception, Briet and Tuve hoped to determine the actual
height of the ionosphere. This distance measurement was critical since the
ionosphere was used in long-distance communication as a radio “reflector.”
Reliable and practical long-range radio communication would require accurate measurements. By 1925, these experiments had proved successful, and
a reliable height measurement system was developed.
Spurred by extensive military research and development conducted just
before and during World War II, researchers built radar systems that could
measure an object’s azimuth and range. To accurately determine the azimuth,
the radar pulse had to be directed in a tightly focused beam only 1° or 2° in
width. To accurately measure the object’s range, the transmitter and the receiver
had to be placed in approximately the same position. Instead of operating
continuously, the transmitter emits short-duration, high-energy pulses. These
pulses last approximately 1 microsecond, and for the next 999 microseconds,

Theory and Fundamentals of Radar Operation

321

the transmitter is switched out of the circuit and the receiver is placed
into the circuit to listen for any echoes. This procedure is repeated about
1,000 times per second. To determine the range to the reflecting object, the time
that elapses between the transmission of the radar pulse and reception of its
echo (see Figure 8–2) is measured. This operating principle is much different
from CW radar and is known as pulse-type radar.

Figure 8–2. An example of a radar pulse being reflected off an aircraft.

322 / CHAPTER 8
In 1931, Taylor and his team of Navy researchers collaborated with the
U.S. Army to develop a primitive radar system that could detect airborne aircraft up to 50 miles away. This system was probably the first use of radar in a
functional setting. Following this development, progress in radar development
escalated in the United States, Britain, and Germany. In 1936, the U.S. Navy
experimentally used radar to control the guns of the battleship New York. In
1939, the first commercial contract for naval radar acquisition was let to the
Radio Corporation of America (RCA).
In 1937, the U.S. Army Signal Corps experimentally used a low-powered
radar to direct searchlights designed to illuminate airborne aircraft. Known as
the SCR-270, this system became the core of two different radar systems that
played an important role in World War II. The SCR-268 system was developed
to detect and track aircraft to facilitate aiming searchlights and antiaircraft
guns. The SCR-270 was further developed to provide advance notice of an
impending aerial attack.
Parallel radar development programs were taking place in Great Britain
during this period as well. In 1934, the Air Ministry established the Committee for the Scientific Survey of Air Defense, which pursued research in many
directions. At the National Physical Laboratory, Sir Robert Watson-Watt developed an experimental pulse-type radar system. In 1935, an experimental system
based on his research was installed on a small island in eastern Great Britain.
This station successfully detected airborne aircraft, and by 1936, the Royal Air
Force began constructing five additional radar installations. By the early 1940s,
a chain of stations blanketed the British coastline, making invaders virtually
unable to approach without being detected.
Researchers eventually simplified the pulse radar system operation by
designing a transmitter and receiver that could alternately use (by way of a
device known as a duplexer) a common antenna mounted on a rotating base. The
duplexer electronically isolated the receiver during pulse transmission (because
a high-energy pulse would probably destroy it) and also isolated the transmitter
whenever the receiver was activated to listen for echoes. This system enabled
the radar beam to be rotated in any direction to “listen” for echoes. If an echo
was received, the operator could easily determine the target’s azimuth from the
transmitter by using mechanical indicators and eventually electrical readouts.
Researchers also discovered that they could determine an object’s range. Since
the transmitted pulses travel at the speed of light (186,000 miles per second), the
time difference between transmission of the pulse and reception of its reflection
could be measured and used to calculate the range to the object. This system
serves as the basis for today’s air traffic control radar systems.
Components
of Radar
Systems

Modern radar systems are composed of at least the following four components:
the transmitter, antenna, receiver, and display. Figure 8–3 presents a block diagram of a radar system.
Transmitter The transmitter actually creates the high-powered radio pulses
used by the radar system. Modern radar transmitters operate on frequencies in

Theory and Fundamentals of Radar Operation

Transmitter

323

Duplexer

Azimuth
data

Modulator

Receiver

Synchronizer

Plan position
indicator

Figure 8–3. Block diagram of a radar system.

t

p

Repetition period
T

Figure 8–4. Waveform of the pulses transmitted by a radar system. Each pulse is of
limited duration, with a substantial quiet period between pulses. The number of pulses
transmitted per second determines the system’s pulse repetition frequency (PRF). The
repetition period is inversely proportional to the PRF.

the UHF band or higher. Early transmitters were vacuum-tube designs; newer
models are constructed almost entirely of solid-state devices. As noted earlier,
the radar pulse lasts about 1 microsecond; the pulses are transmitted rapidly at
a rate of about 1,000 pulses per second. This rate of transmission is known as
the pulse repetition rate or pulse repetition frequency (PRF). An example of the
radar system’s PRF is shown in Figure 8–4. Some radar units have a variable
PRF known as PRF stagger, which will be discussed later in this chapter.
Antenna The antenna functions as both a transmitting and a receiving device.
The radio pulses emitted by the transmitter are routed to the antenna using a
waveguide—a hollow metal channel that conducts the microwave energy to
the antenna. The antenna, which is parabolic in shape, is mounted on a rotor.
Most current radar antennas are not solid; they are constructed of a metallic

Westinghouse Corporation

324 / CHAPTER 8

Figure 8–5. An airport surveillance radar rotating antenna.

Radar pulses

Boresight

Antenna

Feedhorn

Figure 8–6. Boresight.

mesh or grid. Although this mesh looks porous, properly constructed antennas
appear solid to microwave transmissions. The antenna’s only function is to
provide a reflecting and focusing surface for the radar pulse. The waveguide
terminates at the feedhorn, located at the focal point of the antenna. The radar
pulse is routed through the waveguide from the transmitter and emanates from
the feedhorn. An antenna assembly is shown in Figure 8–5. After leaving the
feedhorn, the pulse is reflected and focused by the antenna into a narrow, vertical beam approximately 2° wide and 40° high, known as the antenna boresight
(see Figure 8–6).
If this radar pulse hits an object, it will reflect off the object and part of the
reflection will return to the transmitter. Emitting the signal is known as target
illumination, and the reflection is known as the echo.

Theory and Fundamentals of Radar Operation

325

Receiver Immediately after the transmitter shuts off, the receiver is switched
into the circuit to listen for any echoes. If the radar pulse is reflected by an
object, a small portion of the emitted radio energy will return to the antenna
and will be focused back into the feedhorn. This pulse then returns to the
receiver through the waveguide. Since radio energy diminishes proportionately
to the distance it must travel, by the time the echo has returned it will have lost
a considerable amount of power. This pulse must then be amplified, sometimes
at least 1 million fold, so that it can be properly processed and displayed by
the receiver.
Theoretically, the signal can be infinitely amplified, but in actual practice
this is not the case. Any electronic amplifier introduces random signals, known
as electronic noise, into its circuitry during operation. Noise is almost impossible to remove once it is introduced, but it can be managed by incorporating
circuitry into the receiver that deletes any signal with a strength that falls below
a predetermined threshold level. Radar engineers can predict the amount of
noise that will be introduced and then set the threshold limit to a value just
above the predicted noise level. Unfortunately, this technique also causes the
receiver to delete low-energy echoes reflected by distant targets.
Upon receipt of this radar reflection, the radar system measures the time
difference between transmission and reception and uses this calculation to
determine the object’s distance from the antenna. Since radio signals traveling
at the speed of light take 6.18 microseconds to travel 1 nautical mile, these
pulses will take 12.36 microseconds—6.18 times 2—to travel 1 mile, reflect off
an object, and return. This time—12.36 microseconds—is known as a radar
mile. A radar mile is not a distance measurement.
Indicator Once the radar system has received and processed the reflected signal, the object’s relative position can be displayed to the controller in many
ways. In air traffic control, targets are most often displayed on a cathode ray
tube known as a plan position indicator (PPI), radar scope, or just scope.
The PPI is a circular television-type tube that is about 36 inches in diameter
and covered with two types of luminous phosphor. One type emits a lowpersistence, high-intensity blue flash; the other type emits a high-persistence,
low-intensity orange light. This arrangement causes a fairly bright but transient
flash to blossom on the radar screen at the target’s location. The flash begins to
diminish immediately, and the high-persistence phosphor takes over. This type
of phosphor does not cause a very bright light to be emitted, but the light does
persist for a long time—in some cases, up to 5 minutes. This phosphor enables
the controller to visualize where the aircraft has been, because the flashes still
glow faintly on the PPI. Because the flashes are different colors, most PPIs are
equipped with an orange filter that is placed in front of the tube to equalize the
intensity and the color of the emitted light.
The center of the PPI, known as the main bang, corresponds to the physical location of the radar antenna. The top of the PPI is the area north of the
radar antenna; the right side is east, the bottom is south, and the left side is
west. As the radar operates, a faint line, known as the sweep, emanates from

326 / CHAPTER 8

340

350

0

10

20

330

30

320

40

310

50

300

60

290

70

280

80

270

90

260

100

250

110
120

240

130

230
140

220
150

210
200

190

180

170

160

Figure 8–7. Pictorial representation of a plan position indicator.

the main bang to the edge of the radar screen (see Figure 8–7). The sweep line
corresponds with the antenna’s boresight. As the antenna slowly rotates, the
sweep is synchronized with the radar antenna and rotates in the same direction and at the same speed. Most radar antennas rotate at a speed of five to
fifteen revolutions per minute.
Since radio waves being reflected from objects farther away from the
antenna take longer to return, long-range radars must revolve at slower speeds
and at reduced pulse repetition frequencies. If the radars revolve too quickly, by
the time the radio signal is returned from a distant object the antenna will have
rotated a sufficient distance to prevent reception. When attempting to detect
distant targets, sufficient time must be given for echoes to return to the antenna
before the next pulse is generated.
Distance from the radar antenna is determined using precise time measurement between the transmission and the reception of any reflection. The

Theory and Fundamentals of Radar Operation

327

reflected object’s distance is depicted concentrically as range from the main
bang. Its azimuth is determined electronically from the antenna’s exact bearing when the echo is received. An object illuminated by the radar signal will
reflect radar energy; this radar pulse will cause a small dot—known as an echo,
target, or blip—to appear along the sweep at the object’s range and azimuth
(see Figure 8–8). The target’s exact location can be determined by noting its distance from the main bang (range) and its azimuth from the center of the PPI.
The target’s size and intensity vary in relation to its distance from the
antenna, the relative conductivity of the atmosphere, and the radar cross section of the object. Since radar pulses weaken as they travel, distant objects will
reflect less energy than nearby objects. The atmosphere’s relative conductivity may also interfere with transmission. Airborne obstructions—such as dust,
moisture, and precipitation—will cause much of the radar pulse to be blocked
or reflected before it can return to the radar antenna. Precipitation, in particular, can easily block or diffuse most of the radar’s radiated energy.

Figure 8–8. Radar display used by air traffic controllers.

328 / CHAPTER 8
The target’s radar cross section also helps determine the relative size and
intensity of the displayed echo. Radar cross section is a technical measurement
of the relative radar reflectivity of an object. Generally, larger objects have
greater radar reflectivity, which causes more energy to be reflected back to the
radar antenna. Thus, the displayed echo will be brighter and more distinct.
But various factors, such as the aircraft’s configuration, the type of material
used in its construction, and the relative shape of its surface, can significantly
affect its reflectivity, thereby changing its radar cross section. Large metal aircraft usually have greater radar cross sections than fabric-covered, wooden, or
composite-structure aircraft. Propeller-driven aircraft usually appear larger to
a radar transmitter because the rotating propellers appear as large flat disks.
Whether the aircraft is heading toward, away from, or tangentially to the radar
transmitter can also affect its reflectivity.
The object’s distance from the antenna also affects its relative size when
displayed on the PPI. Since the radar’s boresight is usually only 1° to 2° wide,
targets close to the antenna will be illuminated only by a fairly narrow beam
of energy. Targets located near the extreme range of the radar system, however,
will be illuminated by a fairly wide beam. Since the radar receiver has no means
of determining the actual width of the aircraft, its displayed width will be the
same as the width of the radar pulse at the object’s range.
Ground
Clutter

Radar systems used for air traffic control are unable to distinguish between
different types of reflecting objects. Objects that are undesirable to display on
the PPI also reflect radar energy and are known as ground clutter. These objects
include buildings, terrain, radio and television transmitter antennas, electrical
transmission towers, temperature inversions, and precipitation. Cars, buses,
boats, and even flocks of birds can reflect radar transmissions. In fact, almost
any object, solid or liquid, is capable of reflecting radar energy. Although some
of these reflections are useful to the controller, most serve only to clutter up the
display and must be filtered out by the receiver. The means of filtering out this
clutter will be discussed later in the chapter.
The PPI used to display the radar echoes is designed with a high-persistence
screen, which allows the blip to be displayed for a number of antenna revolutions before completely disappearing. The most recent echo will be the brightest, with subsequent echoes being of lower intensity. These lower-intensity
echoes are known as history. The PPI’s persistence permits the controller to
determine the object’s relative direction of flight and its velocity. Faster aircraft
will move farther between each illumination and the PPI will display a greater
distance between successive echoes, whereas slower aircraft will leave histories
that contain closely spaced echoes.

Transmitter
Frequency

As previously mentioned, radar signals are reflected by many unwanted objects.
One method of reducing undesirable reflections is to use a transmitting frequency that tends to be reflected by objects such as aircraft but is absorbed by
most other objects. Extensive research in this area was conducted during World
War II. Researchers classified potential radar transmitting frequencies into five

Theory and Fundamentals of Radar Operation
Table 8–1.
Letter
Code

P
L

S
X

K

329

Radar Frequency Utilization

Applications

Ground-based early warning
Searchlight aiming
DME equipment
Transponders
TACAN
Air route surveillance radar
Airborne search radar
Airport surveillance radar
Storm detection
Precision approach radar
Airborne navigation
Airborne fire control
Cloud detection
Airborne navigation
Airport surface detection
equipment

Nominal
Wavelength
(cm)

Wavelength
(cm)

Frequency
(mHz)

100

77–133

225–390

30

19.35–77.0

390–1,550

10

5.77–19.35

1,550–5,200

3

2.75–5.77

5,200–10,900

1

0.834–2.75

10,900–36,000

categories. Each band was found to reflect off some objects and to be absorbed
by others. The bands were each assigned an identifying letter, selected at random to keep the information secret. Although secrecy is no longer necessary,
the identifying letters are still used to distinguish each band (see Table 8–1).

Receiver Controls
Once the receiver processes the reflected signal, it must be adjusted by the
controller for proper use. The controller has numerous operating controls that
can modify the signal received by the radar system. Some of the controls
include receiver gain, moving target indicator, and sensitivity time control (see
Figure 8–9).
Receiver
Gain

Although the radar system is transmitting a signal with a strength of between
500 and 5,000 kilowatts, the signal reflected by the target may possess only
.01 percent of this power. The signal must be amplified for the radar system to
properly process and display it. The radar receiver has a signal amplifier that
increases the level of the radar echo. Unfortunately, the amplifier cannot distinguish between wanted and unwanted echoes and amplifies them all. During
amplification, various transient electronic pulses, known as noise, are introduced and amplified as well. Once noise enters the receiver circuitry, it cannot
be totally eliminated and might be displayed on the PPI as random targets.

UNISYS Corporation

330 / CHAPTER 8

Figure 8–9. Example of a PPI control panel.

To eliminate these spurious signals from the PPI, FAA air traffic control radar
receivers are equipped with a fixed threshold level that determines which echoes
should be displayed. Any echo with an amplified signal strength that is below
the threshold value will not be plotted, whereas an echo stronger than the
threshold value will be displayed. In general, targets with greater radar cross
sections will reflect sufficient energy and will be displayed. Although this device
tends to eliminate most unwanted signals, it can also eliminate very small aircraft operating at the fringe of the radar system’s effective range.
Another method of eliminating unwanted targets is to modify the receiver’s
level of amplification or gain, thereby effectively selecting which echoes are
displayed. If too many nonaircraft targets are being displayed, the controller
can decrease the receiver’s amplification, thereby reducing the number of targets with amplified signals that exceed the threshold level. This technique generally eliminates most of the noise, but it can also eliminate some of the small
distant targets that should be displayed. If the controller selects a small amount
of receiver gain, only targets with relatively large cross sections will return sufficient energy to be displayed. In most cases, the controller increases the receiver
gain to a value that will display the desired targets but not the noise.
Moving
Target
Indicator

One of the biggest complications with the use of radar for air traffic control is
ground clutter, which occurs whenever the transmitted radar signal is reflected
by nearby stationary objects. The PPI displays these reflections whenever their
amplified signal strength is above the preset threshold level. Ground clutter

Theory and Fundamentals of Radar Operation

331

tends to completely obscure legitimate targets within about 20 miles of the
antenna. In some cases, ground clutter may be so severe that it is impossible to
observe any echoes from aircraft close to the radar site. If radar is to be used
for air traffic control, ground clutter must be suppressed as much as possible
without eliminating the echoes from legitimate targets.
One method of reducing ground clutter is to elevate the plane of the
antenna a few degrees above the horizon, thus directing the radar pulse above
most of the objects creating the ground clutter. But raising the antenna may
also eliminate the display of some low-flying aircraft at the extreme limit of the
radar’s range. Since the frequencies used by radar systems are line of sight, the
Earth’s natural curvature reduces the radar’s ability to detect distant aircraft
flying at relatively low altitudes. This factor may not be as critical with shortrange radar, but any elevation of long-range radar will severely hamper its
ability to detect distant aircraft. At the extreme limit of the radar system’s range
(approximately 250 nautical miles), the radar may not be able to detect aircraft
flying below 5,000 to 10,000 feet. In general, as the angle of the antenna is
increased, more ground clutter is eliminated, but the antenna’s ability to detect
distant aircraft is reduced proportionally. The proper angle of the antenna is
usually a compromise between these two extremes.
Another method of reducing ground clutter is through the use of an electronic filtering circuit known as the moving target indicator (MTI), which uses
phase-change filtering techniques to eliminate any objects that are not actually
moving. This technique assumes that the only objects that an air traffic controller might want to have displayed on the PPI are moving targets. The circuitry
measures the change in the object’s position between each successive radar pulse
by comparing the returned signal’s phase with that transmitted by the radar
system. A moving object that has radial velocity (i.e., the object is moving either
toward or away from the radar antenna) will cause the phase of the transmitted radar signal to shift as it is reflected. Any object without radial velocity
(not moving toward or away from the antenna) will not cause a phase shift
to occur. The MTI circuitry in the receiver compares the phase of each returning echo to determine whether the reflecting object has any radial velocity.
The MTI system concludes that if an object has no radial velocity, it must not
be an aircraft and is not displayed on the PPI. Any object with radial velocity
is displayed on the PPI. Through this technique, MTI circuitry can be used to
eliminate most of the ground clutter from the radar screen. The MTI cannot,
however, eliminate unwanted moving targets such as trains or automobiles.
Fortunately, most of these objects are below the plane of the radar’s transmitted signal and will not cause any serious problems. Figure 8–10 shows a radar
display with the MTI turned off; notice the dominance of the ground clutter.
Now look at Figure 8–11, a display with the MTI turned on.
Unfortunately, it is a physical principle that some of the reflected energy
from a moving target will remain in phase, and the MTI circuitry will eliminate this portion of the echo. Therefore, any object with an echo that is being
processed through MTI circuitry will appear somewhat dimmer on a PPI.
In cases where the reflected energy returning from the object is just barely

FAA

332 / CHAPTER 8

Figure 8–10. Radar display with the MTI turned off. The resultant ground clutter
dominates the display.

above the threshold level, the MTI circuitry may inadvertently eliminate it from
the display.
The MTI may also remove some desirable targets from the radar display.
The MTI circuitry may eliminate hovering helicopters, slow-moving balloons,
and sailplanes if they have no radial velocity. More important, aircraft on
tangential tracks to the antenna’s plane of rotation may also be eliminated.

333

FAA

Theory and Fundamentals of Radar Operation

Figure 8–11. Radar display with the MTI turned on. Ground clutter is virtually
eliminated. Only moving targets remain on the display.

When an aircraft’s ground track is tangential to the rotation of the radar antenna,
it has no effective radial velocity for an instant. Even if the aircraft has forward
velocity, it may have no radial velocity, there will be no phase shift, and the MTI
circuitry will not display the aircraft on the PPI (see Figure 8–12). When the
aircraft’s track becomes nontangential, the MTI system will detect its increasing
radial velocity and will no longer filter the target from the radar scope.

334 / CHAPTER 8

Radial
velocity
decreasing

Radial
velocity
zero

Radial
velocity
increasing

Radar antenna

Aircraft
track

Figure 8–12. As an aircraft flies tangentially to the antenna, its radial velocity begins
to decrease. When exactly tangent to the antenna sweep, the radial velocity will
become zero and the MTI will remove the aircraft from the display.

The use of MTI circuitry will usually remove most slow-moving airborne moisture such as clouds, light rain, and snow from the radar display.
Unfortunately, the MTI is unable to remove all of this precipitation return,
since some precipitation within a storm has radial velocity. In many cases,
it is desirable to observe precipitation returns. Pilots often rely on controllers to give them advice concerning the intensity and movement of weather
displayed on the PPI. If the precipitation begins to obscure aircraft targets,
it must be removed from the display. If the MTI circuitry cannot accomplish this, the controller must turn to circular polarization, which will be
explained shortly.
The controller can adjust the MTI range on most radars to reduce these
unwanted effects. In some cases, the controller may bypass the MTI circuitry
when trying to divert an aircraft around weather that is being filtered out or
when trying to identify a small aircraft at the extreme range of the radar system.
Even though the amount of displayed ground clutter will increase, it may be
operationally advantageous. The MTI circuitry can be bypassed using a control
known as the MTI gate.

Theory and Fundamentals of Radar Operation

335

MTI Gate Since the problem of ground clutter is most prevalent at ranges
close to the radar antenna, most ATC radar systems are designed with a variable MTI range-setting device known as an MTI gate. The MTI gate is a variable control that selects the range limit where radar echoes will be processed
through the MTI circuitry. If, for instance, the MTI gate is set at 20 nautical
miles, every echo from objects less than 20 miles from the radar antenna will be
processed through the MTI circuitry, whereas reflections from objects farther
away than 20 nautical miles will not. This procedure reduces ground clutter
and the echo intensity of nearby aircraft but retains the full strength of echoes
reflected from distant targets. In normal use, the MTI gate is set to as low a
value as possible while still attempting to eliminate as much ground clutter as
possible.
Blind Speed Since MTI circuitry routinely filters out targets with little or no
radial velocity, one could logically conclude that as a target’s radial velocity
increases, the effect of MTI circuitry on the target intensity decreases. This
conclusion is true, up to a point, after which a further increase in radial velocity tends to actually increase the effect of MTI. At some point, even though the
aircraft still has radial velocity, the MTI may be unable to detect it and may
conclude that the target is stationary; this speed is known as the MTI blind
speed. In technical terms, blind speeds occur whenever a moving target’s radial
velocity travels exactly one-half, or any multiple thereof, of the wavelength of
a radar transmission between pulses. Typical blind speeds for a radar system
with a constant pulse repetition frequency might be 250 knots, 500 knots, 750
knots, and so on. At these velocities and PRFs, an aircraft with a radial velocity
equal to one of these speeds would travel exactly one-half wavelength between
successive radar pulses. A radar system’s blind speed can be easily calculated.
If the PRF is multiplied by 291 and then divided by the radar transmitting
frequency (in mHz), the resultant value will equal the blind speed in knots. For
example, a radar system operating at 3,000 mHz with a PRF of 1,200 will have
a blind speed of 116 knots:
1,200 ⫻ 291 ⫼ 3,000 mHz ⫽ 116 knots
The easiest method for eliminating MTI blind speeds is to vary the rate
of transmission of the radar pulses, known as PRF stagger. Radar transmitters equipped with staggered PRFs sequentially use two or more different pulse
repetition frequencies. If, for instance, a typical system used a PRF of 1,200
during the first pulse transmission, the blind speed would be 116 knots. But
if the PRF were changed to 800 during the next transmission, the blind speed
would then be 78 knots. Since it is highly unlikely that any aircraft would be
able to instantaneously decelerate from 116 knots to 78 knots in less than
one-thousandth of a second, the use of PRF stagger by the FAA has virtually
eliminated the problem of blind speeds. Although harmonic blind speeds may
still cause the MTI to remove aircraft from the PPI, these speeds are usually in
excess of 1,000 knots.

336 / CHAPTER 8
Moving
Target
Detection

The moving target detection (MTD) system was developed to address many of
the shortcomings of the MTI system. In particular, MTD attempts to mitigate
blind speed, tangential course, and precipitation display problems inherent in
MTI-based radar systems.
MTD is a digital signal processor, which means that the radar returns
are converted to digital data, analyzed by various filters, assigned numeric
values, and then stored in computer memory. During routine operation of a
digital radar equipped with MTD (such as the ASR-9 or ASR-11), reflected
radar energy is processed by the MTD system and then stored into computer
memory known as memory range cells. The data in the memory range cells are
stored in a manner very similar to the random-access memory (RAM) used by
personal computers.
The primary radar returns stored in the memory range cells are first analyzed by a variety of Doppler filters. These filters operate at different frequencies, with each attempting to determine whether any object located within a
particular range cell is moving or not. If no radar energy is returned from a
particular azimuth/range, then the number zero is entered into the appropriate range cell. But if any radar return is detected (whether moving or not),
the Doppler filters try to resolve whether any or all of the return is coming
from a moving object and then assign a numeric value to that target, which
is stored in the appropriate memory range cell. After subsequent processing,
the digital value is converted to a visual target, which is plotted on a radar
display similar to high-definition video monitors used in the commercial computer industry.
Clutter Map The FAA conducts tests during the initial setup of the radar system to determine the locations of permanent, stationary objects (such as buildings, terrain, and man-made objects) within the radar range. Stationary objects
are further identified during normal operation. Using Doppler filters, the MTD
system recognizes when a stationary radar return is consistently returned from
a fixed location. After a set period of time, if the object never shows any motion,
the MTD system determines that the object is stationary and stores a value
that relates to the amount of radar energy reflected by the stationary object in
the appropriate range cell for that location. When all stationary objects have
been identified within the coverage area of the particular radar system, this
information is saved in a digital file known as the clutter map. A clutter map is
a stored series of values that define the nonmoving objects routinely detected
by the radar system.
During normal operation of the radar, when the radar return for any particular range cell is analyzed, if a Doppler shift is detected, the radar assumes
that a moving target has been detected. Even if some of the radar energy is
being reflected from a stationary target located at the same azimuth or distance,
the MTD system can use the stored values in the clutter map to determine how
much radar energy is being reflected from the moving target and how much
from the stationary target, and the MTD will display a valid radar return associated with the aircraft.

Theory and Fundamentals of Radar Operation

337

Geo-Map The clutter map is very effective at removing stationary objects
from the radar display, but it is not able to remove moving nonaircraft radar
returns, such as those reflected off of vehicles traveling on the airport’s surface
or near the airport. These returns are mitigated through the use of the Geo-Map
function of the MTD system.
The Geo-Map is similar to a clutter map in that it is programmed into
the MTD system during installation. The Geo-Map system digitally defines
the areas near the airport where vehicular traffic might be operating. During
normal radar operation, when a target is identified and assigned a radar return
value, the Geo-Map subsystem processes the value to determine whether the
radar return frequency pattern resembles that belonging to a vehicle. If the
radar return resembles that of a vehicle, and it comes from an area where
vehicular traffic is common, the Geo-Map subsystem will inhibit its display on
the radar system.
Merge/
Tracking

The merge/tracking subsystem correlates the radar returns from the primary
radar system to those received from the secondary (transponder-based) radar
system and attempts to predict the future location of each aircraft. The
associating of primary and secondary radar returns from a single aircraft is
referred to as collimation but is more often called the merge function.
Collimation is the process of determining which primary radar target belongs
with which secondary radar target, merging the appropriate position information and then displaying the combined target on the radar display. This
enables the radar system to display aircraft identification and other appropriate information concerning that aircraft as well as to perform some
computer calculations.
Once the merge system has collimated each target, its position is stored
in the computer system for future computations. By storing the previous
location of each aircraft and then calculating the distance each target travels
between successive radar scans, the radar system can estimate the ground
speed of the aircraft as well as its future location (assuming the aircraft does
not change course or speed). This function, known as tracking, makes it possible for the computer to project aircraft flight paths and altitudes and warn
the controller if aircraft are predicted to come too close to one another, or
if one aircraft is flying at a dangerous altitude and is projected to approach
an obstruction. These two tracking functions are known as conflict alert and
minimum safe altitude warning. Future tracking enhancements to the computer
system will enable the controller to use the computer to monitor and determine
optimal flight profiles, arrange appropriate approach and departure sequencing, and provide potential conflict evaluations on a real-time basis well ahead
of the aircraft’s current position.

Sensitivity
Time Control

Since objects near the radar antenna tend to reflect more energy back to the
antenna than objects farther away, the echoes on the PPI associated with these
close targets will be much brighter than the others. Besides being distracting to
the controller, these brighter targets persist for an excessive period, thereby

338 / CHAPTER 8
cluttering the radar screen. To prevent this clutter, some means of equalizing the
intensity of all of these targets must be provided.
Sensitivity time control (STC) circuitry is an electronic means of automatically controlling the receiver’s sensitivity to equalize the display intensity
of both nearby and distant targets. The circuitry reduces the receiver’s sensitivity during the initial segment of the listening cycle, when strong echoes from
nearby targets are received. After a few microseconds, the receiver sensitivity is
gradually increased to normal to compensate for the reduced signal strength of
echoes returning from distant targets. In most cases, the STC circuitry returns
the receiver sensitivity to normal at approximately the same time that echoes
reflected from objects located 20 miles away from the antenna are received,
about 247 microseconds into the listening cycle. Therefore, any signal reflected
from an object farther than 20 miles from the radar antenna is not attenuated
by the STC circuitry.

Transmitter Controls
Although MTI and MTD can eliminate most nonmoving targets from the PPI,
they are unable to eliminate most heavy precipitation. Raindrops, hail, and
even snowflakes are excellent radar reflectors. Since most heavy precipitation
has some inherent velocity, the moving target circuitry is unable to remove it
from the PPI. During periods of widespread, heavy precipitation, the resultant
clutter may completely mask actual aircraft targets. In an effort to remove as
much of the echoes as possible, the FAA has equipped most radar transmitting
systems with a means of switching from linear polarization (LP) to circular
polarization (CP).
Polarization refers to the general orientation of the radar waves as they
emanate from the radar antenna. The radar system normally operates with
every radio wave polarized linearly, which means that the waves are parallel to
each other. In this mode, the receiver makes no attempt to determine the polarization of the reflected signal. But, during periods of heavy precipitation, the
radar transmission can be changed so that the transmitted signal is polarized
in two directions, one wave being polarized perpendicularly to the other. One
wave is known as the vertical wave, and the other is the horizontal wave. When
these waves are added electronically, the combination produces a vector that is
a perfect circle, hence the name circular polarization.
The general principle of CP is that symmetrically shaped objects, such as
raindrops, will reflect equal portions of the radar pulse’s horizontal and vertical components, whereas asymmetrical objects, such as aircraft, will reflect
uneven proportions of these two waves. When operating in the CP mode, the
receiver measures the relative amount of vertical and horizontal polarization
contained in each echo, subtracts one from the other, and uses the remaining
signal to provide the echo on the PPI. The equal horizontal and vertical components of reflections from symmetrical objects will cancel each other out,

Theory and Fundamentals of Radar Operation

339

and no reflected energy will remain to be displayed. However, the signals from
asymmetrical objects will always contain some energy after this electronic subtraction has occurred, and the echo will then be displayed on the PPI, albeit
with less intensity.
When properly used, CP removes most of the unwanted precipitation
returns, but it also reduces the display intensity of legitimate targets. Thus, CP
should be used only when heavy precipitation echoes threaten to overwhelm
the rest of the targets on the radar display.

Display Controls
A typical radar system may have anywhere from one to twenty different PPIs
operating off a single transmitter, antenna, and receiver. Each PPI display is
equipped with controls that permit the controller to select or modify the display. These controls include range select, range mark interval and intensity,
receiver gain, video map, and sweep decenter (see Figure 8–9).
Range
Select

The range select switch is used to select the range limits that should be displayed on the PPI. This control does not affect the operating range of the radar
system—only the range to be displayed on that particular PPI. The selected
range is measured in nautical miles from the center of the PPI to its edge (the
radius). Airport surveillance radar systems used in approach and departure
control facilities usually have a maximum range of about 100 nautical miles,
with range select settings of 5, 10, 20, 40, 60, and 100 nautical miles. Air route
surveillance radars used by ARTCC controllers usually have a maximum operating range of about 250 nautical miles, with range select settings of 50, 100,
150, 200, and 250 nautical miles.

Range Mark
Interval and
Intensity

Air traffic control radar displays also have various range mark intervals that
can be superimposed on the PPI as concentric circles centered on the main bang.
The controller can select both the intensity and the spacing of these range marks.
Intensity is usually continuously variable from nonexistent to very bright,
whereas spacing can be set to either 2-, 5-, 10-, or 20-nautical-mile intervals.

Receiver
Gain

Each PPI is also equipped with controls that vary the amplification of the radar
reflections received by the radar system. The normal video gain control varies
the intensity of the echoes being processed by the radar receiver. The MTI/MTD
video gain control varies the intensity of the radar returns processed through
the MTI/MTD circuitry. Through these two controls, maximum target intensity
can be achieved while reducing the ground clutter as much as possible.
In most cases, MTI/MTD video gain is set fairly high, which amplifies the
intensity of the moving targets displayed on the PPI. At the same time, the normal video gain is set fairly low, which reduces ground clutter while still effectively displaying slow-moving targets. If a distant target is difficult to detect,
however, the normal video gain may be increased to assist in distinguishing the

340 / CHAPTER 8

Figure 8–13. Sample
video map of fairly
simple airspace.

echo. Although this will also increase the displayed ground clutter, being able
to distinguish the weak target outweighs increased ground clutter.
Video
Map

Every PPI is also equipped with a video map selector and a video map intensity
control. To properly use radar to separate and assist aircraft, the controller
must know the position of each aircraft in relation to airports, navigation fixes,
and airways.
As many as eight different maps may be available to each controller. The
maps include symbology to indicate particular navaid positions, obstructions,
airways, and intersection locations. Airport locations and the extended runway centerlines used for instrument approaches are also included on most video
maps (see Figures 8–13 and 8–14). Sector boundaries and other important information defined in facility directives or letters of agreement are also contained in
the maps. Every PPI display within a facility will usually have access to the video
maps available at that facility. If the airspace is relatively simple, the facility may
need only one video map that can be used at every radar position.
Most ATC facilities are of sufficient complexity that a specific number of
different maps must be made available to each controller. Each of these maps
is designed to be used by a different type of controller or for a particular airspace configuration. For example, an approach controller may use map 1 when
arrivals are landing on a particular runway, but he or she may use map 2 when
approaches are being conducted to another runway. Map 3 may be designed for
the departure controller’s use, whereas map 4 may contain specific information
most useful to the local controller. Map 5 may include every known obstruction

Theory and Fundamentals of Radar Operation

341

Figure 8–14. Sample video map of fairly complex airspace.

and airport location and may be used whenever a controller is assisting an aircraft experiencing an emergency.
Every PPI has a control that selects the map to be displayed and another
that varies the map’s working intensity. The working intensity is usually based
on the controller’s preference. Some controllers work best using a very bright
map, whereas others prefer to work with an almost unreadably dim map.
Sweep
Decenter

Although the main bang is normally located at the center of the PPI, this position may not always be ideal during particular operations. If, for instance, one
PPI in a TRACON is being used to separate aircraft east of the airport, the
controller might want to display the airspace directly east of the airport and
expand the PPI’s range so that the sector could almost fill the display. To accomplish this, the controller might decenter the main bang and move it to some
other location, such as the far left of the screen, using the sweep decenter controls. The sweep decenter consists of two controls: one moves the main bang in
a north-south direction, whereas the other moves it in an east-west direction.
The coordinated use of both controls permits the controller to move the main
bang anywhere on the PPI. In fact, the main bang can even be moved completely off the screen.

342 / CHAPTER 8

Types of Air Trafﬁc Control Radar
In general, four radar systems are used in air traffic control in the United States:
(1) precision approach radar, (2) airport surveillance radar, (3) air route surveillance radar, and (4) airport surface detection equipment.
Precision approach radar (PAR), used primarily by the Department of
Defense as a precision landing aid, is being rapidly replaced by the ILS and
MLS systems (thus, PAR will be given only a cursory discussion in this text).
Airport surveillance radar (ASR) is a short-range radar that approach and
departure controllers use primarily within the vicinity of busy airports. Air
route surveillance radar (ARSR) is a long-range radar that ARTCC controllers
use to provide en route separation of aircraft. Control towers use airport surface detection equipment (ASDE), a short-range radar system, during periods
of extremely low visibility to detect aircraft or vehicles moving around the
airport. Precision runway monitor (PRM) is a fast-scan, short-range radar used
to monitor aircraft approaching closely spaced parallel runways.
Precision
Approach
Radar

Precision approach radar was developed in the 1940s as a precision approach
landing aid, when the accuracy and safety of the ILS were still being disputed.
The new system was designed to provide lateral and vertical guidance to the
pilot. Controllers monitoring the PAR displays observed each aircraft’s position in relation to the desired flight path and issued instructions to the pilot that
would keep the aircraft on course. The PAR system, which consisted of a mobile
facility that included radio transmitters, controller displays, and two radar
antennas, was positioned near the approach end of the runway in use. The two
radar antennas scanned the approach path to that runway. One antenna scanned
horizontally and displayed the aircraft’s range and lateral position relative to
the runway. The other antenna scanned vertically and displayed the aircraft’s
range and elevation. The PAR display included a video map that displayed the
proper bearing and glidepath to the runway. Figure 8–15 shows a controller’s
PAR display, and Figure 8–16 provides a graphic presentation of the display.
The controller monitored each aircraft’s progress and advised the pilot to make
the proper heading and rate-of-descent changes to keep the aircraft on the
proper course.
The military preferred the PAR system as a precision approach aid since
it was highly mobile and could be placed into operation at any temporary
airport or landing field within hours. Many PAR installations at permanent
airports were placed on rotating bases in the middle of the airport and could
be turned in any direction to serve any of the runways (see Figure 8–17). While
the military was installing and using PAR, the ILS was still undergoing development and testing and was still not reliable. Even when ILS had been perfected,
it certainly was not a mobile system. The PAR installations, however, could be
airlifted to remote sites and be operational in less than a day. In addition, any
aircraft with an operable communications receiver could use a PAR approach;
no special equipment was necessary. But to achieve the full benefits of ILS, aircraft had to carry expensive navigation receivers.

343

ITT Gilﬁllan Division

Theory and Fundamentals of Radar Operation

Figure 8–15. Precision approach radar display.

Precision approach radar was probably the best choice for military precision approaches due to the Defense Department’s unique operational requirements. Since the military had to provide precision approaches at a limited
number of airfields, the Defense Department could afford to install and operate a PAR installation at every military airfield. The PAR system proved to be
very effective for the military and justified itself during the Berlin airlift when
it guided aircraft to airports at a rate of one every 90 seconds.
Because of its unique requirements, however, the federal government
(through the CAA) chose to implement the ILS across the continental United
States. In retrospect, ILS was the correct choice for civilian aviation. Although the
system was initially beset with a host of problems, it soon became reliable and
accurate. As the base number of ILS installations increased, the airlines and personal aircraft owners began to install ILS receivers, and the price of the receivers
decreased considerably. As pilots gained experience with the system, they soon
accepted its accuracy and safety and began to lobby for additional installations.

344 / CHAPTER 8

+6
Degree markings
at 2° intervals

Alignment reference
range marks
Distance from
touchdown

Glidescope
2.75°

500 ft. plane
2
25 ft.
deviation
lines

Safety zone
limits

1

Antenna
site

Horizontal
reference
line (0°)

–1°
+15°
Antenna
site

On-course
line

100 ft.
deviation
Runway
parallel
line (0°)

(0°)

–5°

Degree markings
(1° intervals)

Figure 8–16. Graphic presentation of a PAR display.

Eventually, ILSs were installed at many smaller airfields around the country. By
1986, more than 1,000 ILSs had been installed nationwide. The cost to install,
staff, and operate that many PAR installations would have been prohibitive.
Since the late 1960s, the military services have operated PAR installations
while equipping many of their aircraft with ILS receivers. Because most military
aircraft and pilots use civilian airports occasionally, these aircraft must have the
capability to conduct ILS approaches. In addition, most military airfields now
have installed ILS transmitters. The PAR units at these fields are being decommissioned, although they are still kept in reserve and the controllers maintain
proficiency in case a need arises to mobilize these facilities.
Airport
Surveillance
Radar

The primary short-range radar currently used by the FAA is airport surveillance radar. Most major civilian and military airports use ASR systems.
Approach controllers primarily use ASR, which has a range of approximately

345

ITT Gilﬁllan Division

Theory and Fundamentals of Radar Operation

Figure 8–17. Precision approach and automatic landing radar.

100 nautical miles, to separate local aircraft. The first ASRs used by the CAA
were surplus military air defense radars. The first ASR the CAA obtained for
civilian air traffic control was the ASR-1 series. The FAA now uses ASR-8,
ASR-9, and ASR-11 series radars. ASR-9 radar was the FAA’s first solid-state
equipment radar. ASR-11 is the first all-digital radar for use by air traffic
controllers.
ASR-9

ASR-9 is a short-range radar that detects weather and aircraft within a
radius of 60 nautical miles. The primary radar data are processed by moving
target detection circuitry, converted from an analog to a digital signal, and
then transmitted in that format to the appropriate air traffic control facility,
usually a TRACON or tower. At the control facility, the data received from
the ASR-9 are processed and can be displayed by either the ARTS or STARS
computer system.
ASR-9 is known as a dual-channel radar. It has two transmitters and
target receivers/processors, a dedicated weather channel, and dual feed horns.
One feed horn acts as an active low beam for transmitting and receiving, and
a second high beam is configured for receiving only. The system is capable of
processing weather and a total of 700 aircraft targets.

346 / CHAPTER 8
The radar antenna is 9 feet high by 16 1/2 feet wide and revolves at a rate
of 12.5 revolutions per minute. The secondary surveillance (beacon) antenna is
mounted on top of the main antenna reflector. The peak transmitted power of
the primary radar is 1.12 megawatts and can detect a 1 square meter target at
a range of 60 nautical miles.
ASR-11 is the first all-digital airport surveillance radar used by the FAA and
the Department of Defense. ASR-11 is similar in operation to the ASR-9 system. ASR-11 has a civilian range of 60 nautical miles and a military range
of 120 nautical miles. ASR-11 is also called digital airport surveillance radar
(DASR), and it replaces analog systems with digital technology. The primary
radar transmitter generates a peak effective power of 25 kilowatts. The secondary radar system is co-mounted with the primary antenna. The received
radar signal is processed digitally at the radar site and then transmitted to
the air traffic control facility as a digital signal. ASR-11 data can be used by
ARTS or STARS.
The CAA first purchased air route surveillance radar in 1956 to help
ARTCC controllers provide radar separation to en route aircraft. This longrange radar differs from ASR in that it transmits at a higher power level and
at a lower pulse repetition frequency, permitting an effective range in excess of
250 nautical miles. The ARSR radar antennas are larger than the ASR antennas and revolve more slowly to allow time for the distant radar echoes to
return (see Figure 8–18). The first ARSRs ordered were the ARSR-1 series.

Michael Nolan

ASR-11

Figure 8–18. Air route surveillance radar primary and secondary radar system.

Theory and Fundamentals of Radar Operation

347

The FAA now uses modified ARSR-1E, ARSR-2, ARSR-3, and ARSR-4 radar
systems. These radar systems will provide en route radar coverage at least until
the year 2025.
The U.S. Air Force has historically operated numerous radar installations
in defense of North America. In an attempt to decrease expenditures, increase
operational efficiency, and reduce duplication of facilities, the Air Force and the
FAA agreed to jointly operate a number of long-range radar systems, known
as joint surveillance systems (JSSs). Joint surveillance systems use the same
transmitter, antenna, and receiver for the Air Force and the FAA, but they are
also equipped with an electronic splitter that sends duplicate radar information to military and civilian air traffic control facilities for processing. The FAA
uses the information for air traffic control; the Air Force concentrates on air
defense. Maintenance and operation costs are shared jointly by the FAA and
the Department of Defense.
FPS-20

Fixed position surveillance model 20 FPS-20 was designed for military use
in the 1950s and is still used sparingly by the FAA as an en route surveillance
system. FPS-20s provide azimuth and range information for use at ARTCCs.
FPS-20 radars are analog and equipped with integrated digitizer processors and
secondary radar systems to provide digital output to the ARTCCs. Twenty-one
FPS systems are still used by the FAA today. The FPS-20 systems are owned by
the DOD with FAA assistance in maintenance and staffing. They are slated for
replacement sometime in the next decade. FPS-20 has a peak power transmission of 4 megawatts.

ARSR-1

Air route surveillance radar model 1E ARSR-1E was the original FAA longrange radar system based on the FPS-20. Twenty-five of these radars were
installed in the early 1970s by the FAA. ARSR-1E has a peak power transmission of 4 megawatts and a maximum range of 200 nautical miles. It can detect
the azimuth and range of en route aircraft as well as providing analog weather
intensity data. ARSR-1E is connected to a common digitizer (CD), which is a
device that converts analog radar returns into a digitized output for transmission to the ARTCC. ARSR-1E has an integrated secondary surveillance radar
system installed as well.

ARSR-2

Air route surveillance radar model 2 ARSR-2 is a late 1970s vintage radar
that has been updated to operate at least until the year 2025. The FAA operates
eighteen ARSR-2 sites, and they provide the same analog radar information to
the national airspace system as ARSR-1E.

ARSR-3

Air route surveillance radar model 3 ARSR-3 was designed in the 1980s to
provide primary long-range surveillance in a digital format. ARSR-3 provides
moving target indicator, sensitivity time control, range, and azimuth information digitally at the radar site. ARSR-3 provides weather intensity data using a
three-level weather intensity scale. Twelve ARSR-3 systems are operated by the

348 / CHAPTER 8
FAA, and they are slated to continue at least until the year 2025. ARSR-3 has
a peak power output of 5 megawatts.
ARSR-4

Air route surveillance radar model 4 ARSR-4 is a three-dimensional, longrange, rotating phased array, primary surveillance radar with integrated
height finder capability. ARSR-4 is part of the Joint Surveillance System
(JSS), which provides NAS data as well as operating as part of the DOD air
defense surveillance network. A phased array radar has the ability to redirect the radar beam electronically instead of physically re-aiming the radar
antenna. This capability of ARSR-4 can be used to determine an aircraft’s
altitude. By determining the range and elevation angle of an aircraft, its
relative altitude can be roughly calculated. This capability is not accurate
enough for routine air traffic control separation but is invaluable for use
in air defense. ARSR-4 provides range and azimuth data to the FAA, but it
also provides aircraft altitude data, supplied by the integrated height finder,
to the military. ARSR-4 is an all-digital system that also provides standard
six-level weather intensity data to air traffic controllers. There are forty-one
ARSR-4 systems in operation. ARSR-4 systems are funded jointly by the
DOD and FAA. Plans are to keep ARSR-4 operating at least until the year
2025. All ARSR-4 systems transmit a 60-kilowatt primary radar signal and
the antenna rotates at 5 rpm.

Airport
Surface
Detection
Equipment

At airports where the surface visibility often makes it impossible to see each
aircraft, a specialized radar system designed to locate and display the locations
of moving, ground-based aircraft and vehicles has been designed. This shortrange radar system is known as airport surface detection equipment (ASDE).
Figure 8–19 shows the ASDE’s radar antenna and housing.
ASDE provides surveillance of aircraft and airport service vehicles. At
high-activity airports, radar monitoring of aircraft and ground vehicles is
essential for safety during periods of reduced visibility. Aircraft and vehicle
position information are reported even during periods of heavy snow and fog.
The ASDE system is used whenever weather conditions preclude visual observation of the runways and taxiways. Because of its necessary sensitivity, a typical ASDE display is cluttered and difficult to interpret. Installation of the ASDE
system is cost effective only at high-activity airports where reduced visibility is
commonplace.

ASDE-X

ASDE is a primary radar system that detects both vehicles and aircraft but does
not provide the controller with a particularly clear display. ASDE-X is a newer
airport surface traffic management system that uses multiple sensors to locate
and display aircraft operating on or in the vicinity of the airport. ASDE-X uses
a combination of ASDE primary radar and transponder sensors to display aircraft position and identity on ATC tower displays. The system is also designed
to eventually receive input from ADS-B transmissions when that technology
becomes part of the National Airspace System.

349

Norden Systems Division of United Technologies

Theory and Fundamentals of Radar Operation

Figure 8–19. Airport surface detection radar antenna and housing.

ASDE-X merges the data from the primary ASDE radar located at the
airport, with replies from airport transponders received by multiple passive
receivers, known as multilateration, as well as digital airport surveillance
radar(s) if available. By merging the data from these sources, ASDE-X is able
to determine the position and identification of aircraft and properly equipped
vehicles operating on the airport, as well as aircraft flying within 5 miles of
the airport.
Controllers in the tower see this information presented as a color display
of aircraft and vehicle positions overlaid on a map of the airport and surrounding airspace. The system uses commercial off the shelf (COTS) hardware and
software and will be able to handle both hardware upgrades (ADS-B) and any
automated software safety solutions developed by the FAA in the future. Pilots
operating at ASDE-X-equipped airports need to be reminded, usually via the
ATIS, to keep their transponders on while taxiing. Typically, a pilot will leave
the transponder off until just prior to take off and then turn it to standby or
off right after landing.

350 / CHAPTER 8
The first ASDE-X became operational at Milwaukee, Wisconsin, in 2003.
Since then, thirty-five major airports have been designated to receive, or have
already received, ASDE-X. These airports include the following:
Baltimore-Washington International Thurgood Marshall Airport
Boston Logan International Airport
Bradley International Airport*
Chicago Midway Airport
Chicago O’Hare International Airport*
Charlotte Douglas International Airport*
Dallas-Ft. Worth International Airport
Denver International Airport
Detroit Metro Wayne County Airport
Ft. Lauderdale/Hollywood Airport
General Mitchell International Airport Milwaukee*
George Bush Intercontinental Airport, Houston
Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport*
Honolulu International-Hickam Air Force Base Airport
John F. Kennedy International Airport New York
John Wayne-Orange County Airport, Santa Ana, California
LaGuardia Airport New York
Lambert-St. Louis International Airport*
Las Vegas McCarran International Airport
Los Angeles International Airport
Louisville International Airport-Standiford Field*
Memphis International Airport
Miami International Airport
Minneapolis St. Paul International Airport
Newark Liberty International Airport
Orlando International Airport *
Philadelphia International Airport
Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport
Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport
San Diego International Airport
Salt Lake City International Airport
Seattle-Tacoma International Airport*
Theodore Francis Green State Airport Providence, Rhode Island*
Washington Dulles International Airport*
William P. Hobby Airport, Houston, Texas*
* Indicates ASDE-X is installed and operational at this airport

Precision
Runway
Monitor

Precision runway monitor (PRM) radar systems are used at airports with
closely spaced parallel runways. PRM permits pilots to fly simultaneous ILS
approaches to runways with centerlines separated by less than 4,300 feet but
are at least 3,400 feet apart. As part of this procedure, a final approach controller is responsible for monitoring the aircraft to ensure proper separation.

Theory and Fundamentals of Radar Operation

351

PRM utilizes a nonrotating phased array antenna that uses monopulse
secondary radar technology to scan the final approach area rapidly, detecting aircraft blunders much faster than a mechanically scanned radar system.
When ILS/PRM approaches are developed for a pair of runways, a no transgression zone (NTZ) is established between the two runways. If one aircraft
deviates from the final approach course and enters the no transgression zone,
the monitoring controller immediately issues instructions to the aircraft on the
other approach path to ensure separation. Typically, the other aircraft would
be turned away from the runway and issued a climb.
TRAFFIC ALERT, (aircraft call sign) TURN (left/right) IMMEDIATELY,
HEADING (degrees), CLIMB/DESCEND AND MAINTAIN (altitude).
Since time is of the essence when aircraft are operating less than 1 mile
apart, the controller monitors and has override capability both on the local
control and the approach control frequencies. In most cases, the monitor controller never communicates with pilots but simply constantly observes the final
approach area and breaks aircraft off the approach if necessary. Precision runway monitor is currently installed and operating at the following airports:

Air Trafﬁc Control Radar Beacon System
One of the most significant developments in air traffic control technology has
been the development of a secondary radar system known as the air traffic control radar beacon system (ATCRBS), or secondary surveillance radar (SSR), or
simply secondary radar. The ATCRBS was introduced in 1956, and its development achieved many of the goals set by the Project Beacon task force.
Primary radar efficiency and operation depend on a number of variables,
including transmitter power, aircraft size and distance from the radar antenna,
atmospheric conditions, and obstructions that may interfere with the transmitted radar signal. In addition, primary radar systems detect and display every
aircraft within the range of the radar antenna, even if it is above or below the
vertical limits of the controller’s assigned sector. When using primary radar for
air traffic control separation, a controller cannot positively determine each aircraft’s altitude; instead he or she must depend on accurate altitude reports from
the pilot—a time-consuming, inefficient, and potentially inaccurate means of
verifying each aircraft’s altitude. The ATCRBS can be used to alleviate many of
these deficiencies.
It is difficult for a controller to positively identify a particular aircraft
from primary surveillance radar. To determine an aircraft’s identity, the controller must depend on the pilot-reported position. This procedure is fraught with
potential hazards because many pilots who contact ATC facilities for assistance are unsure of their position. Thus, the effectiveness of using radar to
help locate and identify these lost aircraft is reduced. Although there are other
methods of identifying aircraft using primary radar, such as requiring the pilot
to make a specific number of turns, the possibility of misidentifying an aircraft

352 / CHAPTER 8
still remains. As long as positive radar identification of aircraft is this difficult,
primary surveillance radar is an ineffective aircraft separation tool.
Using primary surveillance radar, the controller must initially identify each
aircraft and maintain this identification while the aircraft is under his or her
control. This is time-consuming and mentally exhausting for the controller. In
an attempt to maintain positive identification, air traffic controllers often used
modern versions of the “shrimp boats” described in Chapter 1. Constructed
of clear plastic, these modern shrimp boats carried the aircraft’s identification
and call sign penciled on their sides. As the aircraft progressed across the radar
screen, the controller manually moved the shrimp boat, keeping it next to the
radar echo.
Development
of ATCRBS

Just before World War II, research had been conducted on a limited basis
to try to alleviate some of the problems inherent in primary radar systems.
The war helped to accelerate the development of a system that could differentiate between hostile and friendly targets on radar displays. Used
extensively by the Royal Air Force in the air defense of the British Isles, this
primitive radar identification system was known as identification friend or
foe (IFF).
The IFF system used a ground-based transmitter (known as the interrogator) to broadcast a coded radio signal to the aircraft. The radio signal was
composed of two pulses, known as framing pulses, separated by a short interval
and collectively known as the challenge pulse. This challenge pulse could be
sent in different modes. Each mode was identified by the interval of time that
elapsed between each framing pulse. Every aircraft participating in the IFF
program was equipped with a transponder that received the challenge signal,
determined whether it was set to a mode that should be responded to, and if so
returned a coded signal known as the reply.
The IFF transmitter could be set to operate in many available modes.
Only aircraft with transponders that were set to the specific mode would reply
to an interrogation. Each aircraft operating in a particular mode was assigned a
unique code that could be used to determine that specific aircraft’s identity. This
combination of modes and codes was used to identify every aircraft appearing
on the radar screen as either friendly or hostile.
The IFF system operated in conjunction with the primary radar system. If
the IFF system determined that a target was “friendly” (by responding with the
proper code in the appropriate mode), a designating symbol would be overlaid
on the primary radar target displayed on the PPI. The aircraft’s code could also
be determined by interpreting the IFF symbol. If an aircraft did not respond in
the proper mode or with the proper code, or if it did not reply to the IFF challenge at all, it was assumed to be an enemy aircraft. This system was probably
one of the most important and unsung developments of World War II. Without
the IFF system, it is highly unlikely that the Royal Air Force would have been
able to defend the British mainland.
The air traffic control radar beacon system was developed using many
of the same principles and the basic components of the IFF system. The

Theory and Fundamentals of Radar Operation

353

ATCRBS uses two ground-based antennas to transmit a challenge to every
aircraft using six different modes. Every aircraft equipped with a transponder
that can be set to reply when challenged in any of these modes can generate a
coded reply. Ground-based computers can use this information to determine
the aircraft’s identity, predict flight paths, and provide other essential information to the controller.
One of the two secondary radar transmitting antennas is physically
located directly on top of the primary radar antenna and rotates synchronously
with it. The other ATCRBS transmitting antenna is placed in a fixed, vertical
position next to the rotating antenna and is used for side lobe suppression
(SLS), which will be discussed under “Secondary Radar System Deficiencies.”
To participate in the ATCRBS, each aircraft must be equipped with a transponder that can respond to any one of six modes and that can reply using one of
4,096 pilot-selectable codes.
The rotating antenna transmits short-pulse pairs on a frequency of
1030 mHz. This interrogation signal, composed of two pulses known as P1
and P3, is transmitted sequentially using each of the six modes. (P2 is a pulse
transmitted by the side lobe suppression antenna and will be discussed shortly.)
Any aircraft transponder set to reply to one of these modes will reply on a
frequency of 1090 mHz.
Each mode can be identified by measuring the time interval between
the two pulses. The six different modes and their pulse intervals are shown in
Table 8–2.
Table 8–2.

Transponder Modes

Mode

Application

Framing
Pulse Spacing
(microseconds)

1

Military

3

2

Military

5

3/A

Military and civilian;
known as mode 3 by
military pilots and mode
A by civilian pilots

8

B

Civilian; primarily
used in Europe

17

C

Civilian; includes
altitude encoding

21

D

Civilian; not
currently being used

25

Characteristic

354 / CHAPTER 8
The aircraft’s transponder will reply to an interrogation with two framing pulses that surround an additional set of pulses used to identify the fourdigit code selected by the pilot. This entire series of reply pulses is known as
a pulse train. The transponder uses the octal numbering system, which uses
only the numbers 0 through 7, to transmit the code selected by the pilot. Each
pulse within the code train is assigned a value based on the octal system. The
ATCRBS receiver on the ground can decode the pulse train and use simple
addition to determine the code selected by the pilot. Numeric beacon decoding systems and advanced computer processing systems can then use this
information to identify each aircraft and perform other air traffic control
functions.
ATCRBS
Display

In its simplest method of operation, the ATCRBS causes a distinct slash, known
as a beacon slash, to be created on the PPI display. This beacon slash directly
overlays the primary target blip and identifies the target as a transponderequipped aircraft, not a vehicle, train, or some other object. Using basic ATCRBS
equipment, the controller can identify which aircraft is producing the slash in
three ways. The controller can instruct the pilot to turn the transponder off or
to the Standby position, which will cause the beacon slash to disappear. After a
few seconds, the controller can then instruct the pilot to turn the transponder
back on, which will cause the beacon slash to reappear. This method of
identification is not very reliable because many situations may cause a beacon
slash to temporarily disappear and then reappear. In most personal aircraft, the
transponder antenna is located on the bottom of the fuselage. Any sustained
turn by the aircraft toward the ATCRBS antenna on the ground will place the
fuselage between the two antennas. The fuselage could shield the airborne
antenna from the ground-based ATCRBS transmitter, and it will appear to the
controller as if the aircraft’s transponder is turned off. When the aircraft completes the turn and levels off, the transponder antenna will no longer be shielded
by the fuselage and it will appear to the controller as if the transponder has
been turned back on.
Two more positive means of aircraft identification require the pilot to
either activate the Ident feature built into every transponder or select a particular code.
Ident Feature When the pilot depresses the Ident button, the transponder
transmits a special reply pulse known as the special identification pulse (SIP)
precisely 4.35 microseconds after the last framing pulse. This SIP is interpreted
by the ATCRBS receiver and causes the beacon slash to become much wider.
This double-width slash persists on the PPI for a couple of sweeps of the radar
antenna. This procedure is a more positive means of aircraft identification
because it is highly unlikely that a double-width beacon slash would appear on
a PPI for any other reason.
Code Selection When the pilot selects a particular code on the transponder, it is known as squawking. Through the use of a selector panel, known

Theory and Fundamentals of Radar Operation

355

as a ten-channel selector, the controller can program the ATCRBS receiver
to produce an extra beacon slash for every aircraft squawking one of the
selected codes. The resultant double beacon slash is often used to determine
which controller has responsibility for the aircraft. In a typical facility, the
approach controller might be allocated the use of transponder code 0400 and
will assign this code to every inbound aircraft. The departure controller might
then be allocated a different code, such as 4600, that will be assigned to every
outbound aircraft. Through the selector panel, each controller can determine
which aircraft is his or her responsibility. The approach controller programs
the ten-channel selector so that only those aircraft squawking code 0400 are
displayed with a double slash. The departure controller then programs the
ten-channel selector so that only those aircraft squawking code 4600 appear
as a double slash. Thus, each controller can identify which aircraft are arrivals
and which are departures.
This primitive system of identification has, for the most part, been replaced
by computerized systems that determine each aircraft’s identity. However, this
basic system has been retained at most ATC facilities as backup for the computer system.
Emergency Code Most ATCRBSs are also designed to sound an alarm and
display a double-width double slash on the PPI whenever a transponder code
of 7700 is received. Code 7700 is reserved for aircraft experiencing some type
of emergency. The unmistakable display created on the PPI is called a double
bloomer because of its shape and appearance.
Altitude Encoding When the interrogator transmits a challenge on mode
C, any aircraft equipped with an altitude-encoding transponder transmits
the aircraft’s altitude using an additional series of pulses. Each pulse corresponds to a number that can be used to identify the aircraft’s altitude.
The numbering system used by altitude encoders is known as the gray scale.
Once received, this altitude information can be processed by the computer
system and displayed directly on the PPI. This altitude display can be used to
eliminate many of the altitude reports commonly used by the controller when
separating aircraft.
Secondary
Radar
System
Deficiencies

Garbled Replies If two aircraft are located at the same azimuth from the radar
antenna and are within 3.3 nautical miles of each other, it is highly likely that
their transponder replies will overlap. The ATCRBS receiver may be unable to
differentiate between the two replies, with unpredictable results. Portions of
either aircraft’s pulse train may not be processed by the system, causing either
or both of the targets to disappear from the PPI. In rare instances, the replies
may overlap in such a way that a false target between the two legitimate targets
is produced. Such false targets may occur even if the two aircraft are separated
vertically. Fortunately, this is a transient problem that can be somewhat controlled through improved receiver circuitry.

356 / CHAPTER 8
Interference Above the continental United States, most aircraft operating over
5,000 feet will be well within the range of two or more ATCRBS transmitters.
Since every interrogator transmits on 1030 mHz, a transponder would have to
reply to a multitude of interrogations in busy metropolitan areas. The aircraft
transponder is unable to differentiate between the various interrogators and
will reply to all, which can cause interference when the ground-based ATCRBS
receivers detect transponders that are replying to other ground-based interrogators. The controller’s PPI may become covered with small random dots,
known as fruit. Fruit can be distracting and dangerous if it interferes with the
controller’s primary duty of separating air traffic. Fortunately, an electronic system of eliminating this interference is used by FAA radar systems. This feature,
known as the defruiter, is normally operational at all times and removes most
of the fruit from the radar display.
Side Lobe Suppression During normal operation, the rotating ATCRBS
antenna also transmits low-powered pulses at angles of approximately 45°
and 90° from the direction of the main transmission. These extraneous and
unwanted transmissions, or side lobes, are common to radio transmissions.
Side lobe transmissions can cause inaccurate aircraft azimuth determination
if an airborne transponder mistakes one of these transmissions as the main
ATCRBS challenge and generates a response. If the aircraft replies to both the
main transmission and every one of the side lobes, multiple aircraft targets will
be generated on the PPI. A close inspection of the PPI display will confirm that
many of these targets are false replies, because no primary targets are being
plotted in the same location. Nonetheless, during heavy traffic, the controller
could easily become distracted by such false transponder targets. In addition,
the multiple targets will confuse most of the computerized radar systems.
To eliminate this problem, airborne transponders have been designed to
take advantage of the fact that side lobe transmissions are much lower in overall signal strength than the main transmission. Transponder circuitry cannot
be designed to identify a side lobe simply by measuring its signal strength,
since the received strength of each lobe is directly proportional to the aircraft’s
distance from the antenna. However, the aircraft transponder can compare the
signal strength of the radar transmission with a reference signal transmitted
from the radar site.
This reference signal is produced by a second ATCRBS transmitting
antenna, known as the side lobe suppression omnidirectional antenna, located
next to the rotating antenna. As previously discussed, the main ATCRBS
antenna transmits two pulses—P1 and P3—at precise intervals with equal signal
strength. The side lobe suppression (SLS) antenna transmits a pulse, P2, exactly
2 microseconds after the P1 pulse and at approximately the same power level.
However, the P2 pulse is transmitted equally in all directions (omnidirectionally).
The aircraft transponder’s SLS circuitry compares the relative signal strength of
the P1 and the P2 transmissions. If they are both the same strength, the transponder concludes that it must have received a direct interrogation signal from
the main lobe of the ATCRBS antenna and generates a suitable reply. But, if the

Theory and Fundamentals of Radar Operation

P1

P2

357

P3

P2 transmission

e

n

ai

P1

d
an

P3

b
lo

M
SLS
antenna

Side lobes
Rotating
antenna

P1

P2

P3

Figure 8–20. Example of main lobe and side lobe interrogation by the ATCRBS.

P1 pulse is received with lower signal strength than the P2 pulse, the transponder circuitry concludes that it has been challenged by a side lobe and will refuse
to issue any response (see Figure 8–20).
Mode-S

The ATCRBS system uses a rotating antenna physically attached to the primary
radar antenna to send out interrogations. These signals are sent continuously
as the antenna rotates. As a result, every aircraft within range will be interrogated several times and will respond during each radar sweep. This results
in more replies than the ATCRBS really needs, and the excessive transmissions
begin to clog up and interfere with one another. The nonspecific nature of
ATCRBS interrogations also leads to interference and system overload. Since
all ATCRBS interrogations are on one frequency (1030MHz) and all the replies
are on another (1090 MHz), in areas with multiple radars these two frequencies rapidly become inundated and overloaded.
In an effort to reduce this problem, as well as introduce new capabilities
to the system, mode-S or mode “select” was developed. The mode-S system is
a “monopulse” or single pulse secondary surveillance radar system. Mode-S
is also a “discreet” system, in that it can direct interrogations to a single aircraft and that aircraft can generate a single reply. Mode-S was designed to
integrate seamlessly with the ATC system and has been installed across the
NAS. The system has been designed so that older mode-A and C transponders

358 / CHAPTER 8
reply to mode-S interrogations. Newer mode-S transponders will respond to
mode-A/C interrogations from the ground. The mode-S system accomplishes
this by sending out three different signal formats using the same frequencies
as mode-A/C.
The first signal is the “ATCRBS all call” interrogation on 1030 MHz.
This signal is in the same format as normal mode-A/C interrogation. Regular
ATCRBS transponders reply to this signal in the usual manner on 1090 MHz.
Mode-S transponders do not reply to this interrogation. The second signal is
the “ATCRBS/mode-S all call.” It is similar to the previous all call interrogation except mode-S transponders reply with a special discrete code unique to
that aircraft. The third format is the “mode-S discrete” interrogation, and it is
directed at specific mode-S-equipped aircraft. Regular ATCRBS transponders
and nontargeted mode-S transponders will not reply.
This process, along with the monopulse system of operation, will greatly
reduce system load and interference problems. Mode-S also has the capability
to transmit enhanced digital information both to and from targeted aircraft. It
is possible to send digital weather and flight plan information as well as controller request via mode-S. Properly equipped aircraft can also respond with
more information than the typical 4096 code and aircraft altitude. Development of this capability has been placed on hold by the FAA as this capability
will now become part of NextGen through the use of ADS-B. At the present
time, the FAA is no longer installing mode-S interrogators.
Traffic
Collision and
Avoidance
System

In 1986, a collision between a DC-9 and a small aircraft both operating in
VFR conditions near the San Diego airport killed everyone on board both
aircraft as well as fifteen people on the ground. Although the pilots of the
DC-9 had reported the smaller aircraft in sight, a mid-air collision eventually
ensued. After numerous hearings and public discussions, a regulation was
passed requiring all airliners and large aircraft to be equipped with some
form of traffic collision avoidance system (TCAS) (see Figure 8–21).TCAS
uses three separate onboard systems to detect the position of nearby aircraft
and generate avoidance maneuvers. Directional antennae with the ability to
receive mode-S signals determine the bearing of nearby aircraft. The altitude
broadcasts from nearby aircraft are then used to determine the relative altitude of the aircraft and whether they are climbing, descending, or in level
flight. The timing of the mode-S responses is used to determine the relative
distance from the aircraft.
TCAS I, which was the early implementation of the system, visually displays the relative position and altitude of all aircraft within 10 to 20 miles of a
properly equipped aircraft. TCAS I will provide a warning when an aircraft in
the vicinity gets too close. It does not provide instructions to the pilot on how
to maneuver to avoid the aircraft, however.
TCAS II provides pilots with the same information that is available with
TCAS I, but along with warnings, it can suggest and coordinate evasive maneuvers with the other aircraft. If both planes are TCAS II-equipped, the systems

Theory and Fundamentals of Radar Operation

359

Figure 8–21. TCAS display.

coordinate the evasive maneuver via the mode-S data link, ensuring that each
aircraft’s maneuver does not cancel the other’s out.
Traffic
Information
Service

TCAS operates independently of ground surveillance stations and radar, but in
its more sophisticated implementations it can be very expensive. Traffic information service (TIS) was designed to provide a lower cost service using existing ground-based infrastructure, thereby reducing system complexity and cost.
TIS is a ground-based service available to all aircraft equipped with mode-S
transponders. TIS does not provide any escape maneuvering but instead uses
existing mode-S data links to transmit aircraft position information to the pilot
for display in the cockpit.
The first, and most current, version (TIS-A) displays all traffic within
about 10 nautical miles and 4,000 feet altitude of any properly equipped
mode-S aircraft (see Figure 8–22). TIS uses aircraft position information
from ground-based mode-S ATC surveillance systems to provide this traffic
information. The FAA currently provides TIS-A to pilots operating within
the vicinity of mode-S capable ground radar systems (primarily ASR-9 and
retrofitted ASR-8 systems). The FAA plans to discontinue offering TIS-A
and begin the transition to TIS-B when ADS-B becomes available within the
next decade. The capability of ADS-B to provide aircraft position information independent of ground-based radar will make TIS-B available to more
aircraft in more locations. The FAA has therefore decided not to make TIS-A
part of the ASR-11 system. Many pilot organizations are trying to convince
the FAA to reverse this decision as they believe TIS-A should remain available
until ADS-B is operational nationwide.

Michael Nolan

360 / CHAPTER 8

Figure 8–22. STARS workstation.

Computerized Radar Systems
Although aircraft identification using secondary radar was a crude but workable system, it was a vast improvement over primary surveillance radar systems. But, the controller still had to update flight progress strips that included
each aircraft’s identification, route of flight, and altitude and then correlate this
flight information with the corresponding blip on the PPI.
Any misidentification of a particular aircraft could have disastrous results.
During periods of intense traffic, when the controller was responsible for the
separation of twenty or more aircraft, constantly maintaining the identity of
each aircraft was virtually impossible. The clerical duties involved in updating the flight strips and the concentration required to correlate each target
were overwhelming. In addition, the radar systems were unable to discriminate
between IFR and VFR aircraft and could not even determine whether a particular IFR aircraft was within the controller’s assigned sector. Every aircraft
located within the range of the radar system was displayed on the controller’s
PPI. The controller then had to decipher this jumble of information and identify
those aircraft within his or her area of control.
The Project Beacon task force recommended that a computerized beacon decoding system be designed that could decipher this information and
assist the controller in maintaining positive identification of each aircraft. The
system, as envisioned by the authors of the report, would process each aircraft’s transponder replies, and then a computer would verify and correlate
the information with flight plan information such as aircraft call sign, route of

Theory and Fundamentals of Radar Operation

361

flight, and so forth. This information would then be made immediately available
to the controller. Some of the data, such as aircraft call sign and altitude, would
be displayed directly on the PPI; the rest would be instantaneously available
using auxiliary display equipment. The controller would no longer constantly
need to refer to flight progress strips for this information. The computer system would be programmed so that only the aircraft that were the controller’s
responsibility would be displayed. Even with this system, the controller would
still need to update flight progress strips in case of computer malfunction, but
this computerized beacon processing system would improve his or her ability
to separate increasing amounts of traffic while also reducing the amount of
concentration needed to accomplish the task.
One of the first semicomputerized ATCRBSs was a military beacon decoder
system called TPX-42, essentially an advanced version of the identification friend
or foe system developed in World War II. Known as a numeric beacon decoder
system, TPX-42’s primary capability is to decode the aircraft’s transponder reply
and display the four-digit transponder code next to the secondary radar target
on the PPI. TPX-42 is obsolete; it is no longer being installed.
The report issued by the Project Beacon task force focused the FAA’s efforts
on designing a totally new ATC computer system that would be expressly designed
for civilian air traffic control. Initially, it appeared that a common system could
be developed to serve both ARTCC and radar-equipped terminal approach control facilities. As conceived by the task force, this new system would identify each
aircraft, predict its flight path and altitude, automatically pass this information to
the next controller, and display aircraft information directly on the radar screen.
The computer system would also be able to predict aircraft flight paths and
notify the controller before a dangerous situation developed.
Initially, FAA research focused on developing a common computer system
that could be used at every FAA air traffic control facility. But the en route centers and the terminal facilities had widely differing needs that could not be met
using a single system. The ARTCC controllers needed equipment that would
help them separate high-altitude, high-speed IFR aircraft; terminal controllers
needed a system that would be more adaptable to local conditions and a mix of
aircraft. Researchers realized that a single system could not meet the needs of
both types of facilities. Ultimately, three different systems were developed. The
flight plan data processing function was assigned to the ARTCCs and handled by
a system previously described, known as the flight data processing (FDP) system.
In addition, two computerized radar beacon processing systems were eventually developed: the radar data processing (RDP) system, which was destined for
use in the ARTCCs, and the automated radar terminal system (ARTS), which
was designed for use in the terminal environment. Each system was designed to
accommodate the requirements of a particular type of ATC facility.
Automated
Radar
Terminal
System

The first prototype ARTS computer system, designated the ARTS-I, was installed
in the Atlanta (Georgia) air traffic control tower in 1964. The system proved so
successful that it was quickly expanded and installed in the New York Common IFR room (the predecessor to the current New York TRACON) in 1966.

362 / CHAPTER 8
This modified ARTS-I was known as ARTS-IA. The ARTS-I and the ARTS-IA
were essentially identical and provided tracking and identification capability
for aircraft equipped with transponders. The ARTS was designed to identify
each aircraft by matching its transponder code with flight plan data, provided
either by the flight data processing computer located in the ARTCC or from
controller entries made directly into the ARTS. Once the aircraft was identified,
the ARTS computer system maintained constant identification and predicted
the aircraft’s future location. Since the ARTS-I was able to track only aircraft
equipped with transponders, it was known as a beacon tracking level (BTL)
system. A BTL system can track and provide identification and altitude information only on aircraft equipped with transponders.
Once the necessary flight plan data are entered into the ARTS computer,
either manually or from the FDP computer located in the ARTCC, the BTL
radar system can predict flight paths, initiate handoffs, and automatically provide the controller with continuous alphanumeric information on the radar
screen. These alphanumeric data include an aircraft symbol and its associated
data block (see Figure 8–23).
The computer-generated aircraft symbol is overlaid directly on the beacon target to indicate which controller has the responsibility for that aircraft.
Different controller positions are usually assigned unique identifying symbols.
For example, the east arrival controller might be assigned the letter E, whereas
the west arrival controller might be assigned the letter W. The data block associated with each target includes the aircraft’s call sign, the ARTS computerassigned ID number, and the aircraft’s altitude (if the aircraft is equipped with
mode C). The controller uses the computer identification number to extract or
enter flight data concerning that aircraft from the ARTS computer.
The ARTS-I computer system proved to be highly successful in relieving
controllers of the tedious task of maintaining the correct association between

Aircraft
ident

Control position symbol
(tracked targets only)

UA131
040 22

(Mode C
transponder)
Altitude

A
Ground speed
in knots

Figure 8–23. ARTS-III data block.

Beacon
Primary

Theory and Fundamentals of Radar Operation

363

radar targets and flight progress strips. The successful development and implementation of the ARTS system in Atlanta and New York led the FAA to award
a contract for the installation of additional, enhanced ARTS systems at highactivity airports across the United States. This more advanced system is known
as ARTS-III.
ARTS-III

The ARTS-III development contract was awarded in 1969, and by 1973 all of
the needed systems were operational. As originally implemented, the ARTS-III
was a BTL system that could track only transponder-equipped aircraft. In 1976,
the FAA awarded an upgrade contract to add the capacity to every ARTS-III
facility to track and identify aircraft that are not equipped with transponders.
A computer system that can track aircraft using both primary and secondary
surveillance radar echoes is known as a radar and beacon tracking level (RBTL)
system (see Figure 8–24). This enhanced ARTS-III, known as ARTS-IIIA, has
since become the FAA standard for high-activity airports. The ARTS-IIIA system includes the following components: a primary radar transmitter, antenna,
and receiver; an ATCRBS transmitter, antenna, and receiver; a data acquisition
subsystem; a data processing subsystem; a data entry and display subsystem;
and a continuous data recording subsystem.
Transmitter and Receiver The ARTS radar transmitter and receiver are standard FAA air traffic control radar systems. These systems include the FAA

Primary radar antenna

ATCRBS antenna

Beacon data
acquisition
system

Data
processing
subsystem
Beacon data

Radar data

Radar data
acquisition
system

PPI

Figure 8–24. The primary and secondary radar systems transmit data to the data
processing systems of an ARTS-IIIA system. After the data processing system analyzes
the data, they are sent to the PPI for display.

364 / CHAPTER 8
series of civilian radars, such as the ASR-8, ASR-9, and ASR-11 primary surveillance radars. They have a range of about 60 nautical miles and operate with a
peak power of about 500 kilowatts.
ARTS also operates using standard secondary radar interrogators and
receivers such as the ATCBI-5 and the ATCBI-6 secondary surveillance radar
systems, which operate on a variety of modes, such as 1, 2, 3, A, and C. The
secondary surveillance radar system used by ARTS also includes standard side
lobe suppression circuitry.
Data Acquisition Subsystem The data acquisition subsystem (DAS) is a
peripheral device that receives raw radar data from the primary surveillance
radar system and beacon-derived information from the secondary surveillance
system. The DAS then decodes this information, converts it to a digital format,
and channels it to the data processing subsystem for further processing. The
data acquisition system is actually composed of two different subsystems: the
radar data acquisition system (RDAS) and the beacon data acquisition system
(BDAS). The RDAS subsystem digitizes primary radar information, converts
it into a digital format, and transmits this information to the data processing
system. The BDAS interprets the ATCRBS returns, correlates this information
with those targets detected by the primary radar system, and then sends this
information in a digital format to the data processing system.
Data Processing Subsystem The data processing subsystem (DPS) is the heart
of the ARTS-IIIA radar processing system. The DPS is a high-speed digital
computer designed and built by the Sperry Univac Corporation. It accepts
information from three sources: the data acquisition subsystem, the flight data
processing system located at the ARTCC, and the data entry subsystem. The
DPS then correlates this information; that is, it matches transponder codes
received from the ATCRBS with those provided by the ARTCC’s flight data
processing system. The ARTS-IIIA computer is in continuous electronic contact
with the flight data processing computer.
The computer tracks any targets that have flight plan information stored
in its circuitry by matching the stored flight plan information to each identified
target and then predicting the future location and altitude of that target. When
the radar antenna completes an entire rotation, the computer uses that information to look for a target at the aircraft’s next predicted location and continues to process radar data received from that aircraft.
If the primary and the secondary radar returns from any aircraft are temporarily interrupted, the ARTS computer can still predict the track of the aircraft and advise the controller that radar contact has been lost. Aircraft in this
predicament are in a coast mode. While in the coast mode, the ARTS computer
predicts the aircraft’s position and displays this information on the PPI. When
the radar system reacquires the aircraft, the computer displays its exact position and initiates a new track.
Data Entry and Display Subsystem The data entry and display subsystem
(DEDS) displays ARTS-derived information on the PPI. Also, the controller

Theory and Fundamentals of Radar Operation

365

UNISYS Corporation.

can use DEDS to input flight data into the computer. If necessary, the controller’s entries are automatically sent to the FDP computer in the ARTCC. The
DEDS is composed of two separate subsystems: the data display and the data
entry sets. The data display system uses the same PPI used by the radar system
to display the aircraft’s data blocks and other pertinent information. It does
not replace the primary targets and the ATCRBS beacon slashes, but simply
overlays alphanumeric information provided by the data processing system
on the primary and secondary radar information. This system also displays
information such as the current altimeter setting, ATIS code in use, and a list of
projected inbound aircraft in seldom-used areas of the PPI.
The ARTS system only overlays information on the PPI; it does not eliminate the display of primary and secondary targets. Should the ARTS computer
malfunction, the primary and secondary radar systems will continue to operate
and display aircraft position information. Only the alphanumeric information
provided by the ARTS computer system will be deleted from the radar display.
The data entry sets (DES) are the devices the controller uses to input
flight data into the ARTS computer. This system is composed of an alphanumeric keyboard, a quick look selector, and a slew entry device (SED), sometimes referred to as a trackball. The keyboard sends function commands and
flight data to the data processing subsystem (see Figure 8–25). The quick look

Figure 8–25. The data entry sets used on ARTS-III radar systems.

366 / CHAPTER 8
selector permits the controller to select and display the full alphanumeric data
blocks of aircraft under the control of other radar positions within the facility. The trackball is used to enter aircraft position information into the data
processing system. When the controller manually rotates the trackball, a small
symbol on the PPI moves in a corresponding direction. By placing the trackball symbol on top of an aircraft symbol and pressing one or two keys, the
controller can obtain information about that aircraft and can more easily hand
it off.
Continuous Data Recording Subsystem The continuous data recording subsystem (CDRS) is a magnetic-tape storage system that continuously records
digital data that pass through the ARTS-III computer system. This information
can be printed at a later date for data extraction, and events recorded by the
system can be reconstructed for analysis. This feature is particularly useful
when trying to locate lost aircraft, investigate accidents, or determine traffic
patterns around an airport.
ARTS-IIIA
Operational
Characteristics

The ARTS-IIIA system is capable of accomplishing the following tasks:
automatic track initiation, data block generation, automated handoffs, track
drops, target coast, altitude filtering, conflict alert, minimum safe altitude warning, and special beacon code displays. Figure 8–26 is a graphical presentation
of an ARTS-IIIA display.
Automatic Track Initiation Target information received by both the primary
and the secondary surveillance radar systems is transmitted to the data processor and correlated with known flight plan and position information. Using
this information, the data processor follows each target and predicts its future
position. Each target is assigned to one of two groups. The first group consists
of aircraft that have flight plan information derived from the FDP system in the
ARTCC or from information entered by a controller; these aircraft are known
as associated tracks. Any aircraft that has been assigned a transponder code by
the ARTCC FDP system will be automatically tracked when the ARTS system
receives the proper transponder code.
Any other aircraft being observed by either the primary or the secondary
radar system and whose identity is unknown to the ARTS is known as an unassociated track. If the controller wants the ARTS computer to track that aircraft,
he or she must enter the proper flight plan information into the ARTS computer
and the computer will begin an associated track. Once the transponder code is
received by the ARTS, the computer can track that aircraft.
Data Block Generation Any aircraft being tracked by the system will have
an associated data block, which is generated by the ARTS computer and
overlays the primary and secondary radar targets on the PPI. The data block
displays the aircraft’s call sign, computer identification number, ground
speed, altitude (if mode C-equipped), and any other information requested

Theory and Fundamentals of Radar Operation

367

System Data Area
Time
Altimeter
setting

Note: “ARTS” radar scopes combine “broadband” (primary/secondary) radar
targets with alphanumeric data. Lower right hand subset displays “broadband”
primary/secondary radar and ARTS III when operating without automation.

General information (ATIS
runway, approach in use)
Select beacon codes (being monitored)
Radio failure, emergency information

29.89
1210/31
Y ILS 36
02 04 32 34
RF EM

Areas of precipitation
(can be reduced by CP)

Coast/Suspend List (aircraft
holding, temporary loss
of beacon/target, etc.)

2 BNF21 SD 050
3 N12J CN
1 UAL14 SD 040
Arrival/Departure
Tabular list

Targets in suspend status

C AAL369 3412
A USA121 4516
D EAL10 0712
B N44C 0120
E TWA620

A1
A2

Aircraft controlled by Center

V 15892
120 22

Trackball (control)
position symbol (A)

Range marks (10 and 15 mile)
(can be changed/offset)

C

Airway (lines are
sometimes deleted
in part)
Radar limit
line for control
A

Obstruction (video map)
Primary radar
returns of obstacles
or terrain (can be
removed with MTI)

Untracked target
identing on a
selected code
A

Identing Target blossoms

Satellite airports
3412 ID

Runway centerlines
(marks and spaces
indicate miles)

Ident flashes

N 3160 F
36R

Primary airport
with parallel
runways

ID

7700
040

Approach gates

B

Tracked Target (primary
and beacon target)

Aircraft in squawking emergency Code 7700
and is non-monitored, untracked, Mode C

LOW ALT
A

050

VV 170
005 18

Tracked target (primary and beacon target)
control position A
Beacon target only (secondary radar based
on aircraft transponder)

Control Position Symbol
Untracked target select
code (monitored) with
Mode C readout of 5000’

Primary
target only

A
Primary target

Untracked target
without Mode C

Beacon target only
(secondary radar)
(transponder)
Primary and Beacon target

Altitude Mode C readout is 6000’
(Note: Readouts may not be displayed
because of non-receipt of beacon information,
garbled beacon signals, and flight plan data
which is displayed alternately with the altitude
readout.)
Ground Speed readout is 240 knots.
(Note: Readouts may not be displayed
because of a loss of beacon signal, a
controller alert that a pilot was Squawking
Emergency, Radio Failure, etc.)

N

AAL121
060 24

Leader
line

Aircraft
ID

A428 16
050 22H
Indicates
“Heavy”

‘Asterisk indicates a
controller entry in Mode C
block. In this case 5000’ is
entered and “05” would
alternate with Mode C readout.

Controller assigned runway 36 Right
alternates with Mode C readout
(Note: A three letter identifier
could also indicate the arrival
is at a specific airport)

Non-monitored, no Mode C (an asterisk*
would indicate non-monitored with Mode C)

Airways
Navaids
SUBSET
Non-automated “Broadband” Radar Scope
in use at many terminals and certain ARTCC’s.
This also depicts ARTS/NAS Stage A (ARTCC)
scopes when operating in the non-automation
mode. (Video maps are shown but there are no
alphanumerics.)

Ident fills in
between select
code control slashes
(Primary and
Secondary Target)

“LOW ALT” flashes to indicate when an
aircraft’s predicted descent places the
aircraft in an unsafe proximity to terrain.
(Note: This feature does NOT function if the
aircraft is not squawking Mode C. When a
helicopter or aircraft is known to be operating
below the lower safe limit, the “LOW ALT” can
be changed to “INHIBIT” and flashing
ceases.)

Code 7700
Select code, e.g. 2100

Other non-select code
Other nonselect code (beacon target only)
Primary target

Figure 8–26. A graphic presentation of an ARTS-IIIA display.

by the controller. Each controller may determine which data blocks should
be displayed. An arrival controller, for instance, may not want to see the data
blocks associated with departing aircraft. Whenever warranted, the controller may inhibit the data block display of any particular aircraft or any group
of aircraft.

368 / CHAPTER 8
Automated Handoffs If the ARTS-IIIA-equipped facility borders another
ARTS facility or an ARTCC, the ARTS equipment will permit the controller to
perform automated handoffs. To initiate an automated handoff, the controller
must slew the trackball symbol over the appropriate aircraft target and press
the proper key. On the receiving controller’s PPI, the data block for that aircraft
will be flashing. If the receiving controller determines that the handoff can be
safely accepted, he or she slews the trackball symbol over the aircraft’s position symbol and then presses the appropriate key, which causes the data block
to flash on the original controller’s radar screen. At this point, the handoff has
been concluded, and the transferring controller can advise the pilot to contact
the next controller on the appropriate frequency.
Track Drops If the controller or the computer determines that the aircraft no
longer needs to be tracked, the data block will be removed from the display and
the flight plan information will be deleted from the computer. The controller
can initiate track drops at any time. The computer will automatically initiate
them when the aircraft lands or leaves the facility’s designated area of control.
Target Coast If both the primary and secondary radar systems fail to detect
a tracked target, the aircraft will be placed in a target coast mode. During
coast, the aircraft’s computer-calculated position will be displayed on the PPI.
To inform the controller that this is not an accurate position placement, the
target’s tracking symbol will be changed, and the aircraft’s call sign will be
displayed on a coast list located on the edge of the PPI. If after a certain interval, either the primary or secondary radar system fails to reacquire the target,
the aircraft’s track will be automatically suspended and the controller will be
informed.
Altitude Filtering Each controller is given the option of determining the
altitude range that should be displayed on any PPI. To designate an altitude
range, the controller must select an upper and a lower altitude limit. In most
cases, the lower limit would be ground level, whereas the upper limit would be
a few thousand feet above the vertical limit of the facility’s airspace. The ARTS
will not track any aircraft that has an altitude outside this range. Even when
the ARTS is not tracking an aircraft, however, the primary and secondary radar
targets will still be displayed on the PPI.
Conflict Alert Since the data processing system is constantly predicting the
future position of every tracked target, the computer is able to predict whether
two tracked targets may get unacceptably close to each other. If the computer
calculates that a potential conflict exists, the aircraft’s data blocks will begin to
flash, and an alarm will sound. The Conflict Alert function will activate only
when the ARTS computer is tracking both aircraft and knows their altitudes.
If either of the aircraft is not being tracked by the ARTS computer (such as
VFR aircraft not in contact with the controller), the conflict alert function is
not able to predict possible collisions. The FAA plans to eventually program

Theory and Fundamentals of Radar Operation

369

most ARTS-IIIAs to track nonparticipating aircraft and use this information to
provide conflict alert warnings to participating aircraft. This feature is known
as Conflict Alert IFR/VFR Mode C Intruder and will be discussed in detail in
Chapter 12.
Inhibiting the operation of the conflict alert function is advantageous in
certain areas within a facility’s airspace, such as approach courses to parallel runways and areas located near the approach and departure ends of the
runway. In each of these areas, a sufficient number of false alarms would
routinely be produced and would defeat the purpose of conflict alert. The
system would “cry wolf” so often that the controller might ignore an actual
conflict alert.
Minimum Safe Altitude Warning The ARTS can also be programmed to warn
a controller whenever a tracked aircraft appears to be descending too close to
the ground or approaching an area of rising terrain. This feature, known as
minimum safe altitude warning (MSAW), operates by dividing the area served
by the ARTS into 2-mile squares and assigning a terrain value to each square.
If an aircraft’s track is predicted to enter this area at an altitude below the minimum safe altitude or if the aircraft is predicted to eventually descend below this
altitude, the aircraft’s data block will begin to flash and an alarm will sound.
At this point, the controller can advise the pilot of the impending hazard and
recommend corrective action. The MSAW system can be inhibited from operating in areas where it might tend to produce false alarms, such as along the final
approach course to the runway.
Special Beacon Code Displays The ARTS is designed to react to certain
important transponder codes, including the emergency code, 7700; the radio
failure code, 7600; and the hijack code, 7500. Any aircraft transmitting one of
these special transponder codes will cause the aircraft’s data block to flash and
a special message to be displayed on the PPI.
Versions of
ARTS-III

ARTS-III was developed as a programmable, modular system that could be
easily modified and updated as conditions changed. ARTS-III has now evolved
into four different versions: ARTS-III, ARTS-IIIA, New York TRACON ARTSIIIA, and en route ARTS (EARTS).
As mentioned previously, ARTS-IIIA expands the basic ARTS by having
the ability to establish tracks on nontransponder-equipped aircraft and to automatically recover from some computer system failures. In addition, ARTS-IIIA
permits utility or diagnostic programs to be run while the operational program
is still in service. The FAA has converted all basic ARTS-III facilities to ARTSIIIA facilities.
ARTS-IIIE is an enhanced ARTS that provides for multiple radar inputs
and can drive more displays than the ARTS-IIIA. ARTS-IIIE can also send digital
information to remote control towers located at outlying airports. ARTS-IIIE is
installed at the New York TRACON and will become the standard installation
at all large, consolidated TRACONs in the future.

370 / CHAPTER 8
EARTS was developed to serve the offshore ARTCCs in Anchorage,
Alaska; Honolulu, Hawaii; and San Juan, Puerto Rico. The U.S. Air Force has
also implemented a modified EARTS at Nellis Air Force Base, Nevada. A hybrid
radar system that uses ARTS-type computers to drive ARTCC-type displays,
EARTS was developed as an inexpensive way to computerize the operations of
these three low-activity centers.
The EARTS accepts inputs from up to five different radar sites—either
ASR or ARSR sites—and distributes this radar-derived information to the various display consoles in the center. The EARTS computer system evaluates the
validity of this input and determines which data should be displayed to the controller. Thus, the EARTS computer can track aircraft that could not be detected
by systems using only one radar site. This process of selecting, processing, and
displaying radar-derived data is known as creating a radar mosaic.
The ability to create a radar mosaic is what differentiates EARTS from the
standard ARTS. A standard ARTS PPI can display the radar returns from only
a single radar antenna, whereas an EARTS display can mosaic the returns from
numerous radar sites and present the controller with the most valid data from
each site. In addition, EARTS facilities do not use standard PPI displays; instead
they use standard ARTCC displays known as plan view displays (PVDs), which
are necessary if the system is to provide a radar mosaic.
ARTS-II

As traffic increased nationwide in the late 1960s and early 1970s, the FAA
realized that a system of computerized radar processing would have to be
developed for low- to medium-activity facilities. The FAA determined that
ARTS-III was inappropriate because it was too expensive to install and operate and required a team of computer programmers to maintain. TPX-42 was
installed as a stop-gap measure at many of these airports, but it was intended
to be used only until a more appropriate system could be developed. In 1974
the FAA contracted with the Burroughs Corporation (which has since merged
with the Sperry Univac Corporation to form UNISYS) to develop a low-cost
ARTS radar processing system. To differentiate this system from the previous
version of ARTS, it became known as ARTS-II. Initial installation of this
system began in 1978.
The ARTS-II system was originally designed as a beacon tracking level
system that did not provide many of the advanced programmable features
of ARTS-IIIA, such as conflict alert and minimum safe altitude warning. The
ARTS-II uses a minicomputer with a 256K word memory to process beacon
returns and display alphanumeric data blocks on the controller’s PPI. The primary difference between ARTS-II and ARTS-III is that ARTS-II cannot track
nontransponder-equipped aircraft. ARTS-IIs require little maintenance or routine programming, yet they are less flexible and less expandable.
The FAA installed ARTS-II and its successor, ARTS-IIA, at over 100 airports across the United States. These systems are also in use in many foreign
countries. The ARTS-IIA is an enhanced version that provides the controller
with many of the ARTS-III features, such as conflict alert and minimum safe
altitude warning. Although the ARTS-IIA system is somewhat limited in its

371

FAA

Theory and Fundamentals of Radar Operation

Figure 8–27. ARTS-II radar equipment.

programmability, it still provides sufficient computing power to track up to 256
aircraft at one time (see Figure 8–27).
Common
ARTS

Due to the inability of aging ARTS equipment to provide acceptable service, the
FAA and the Lockheed-Martin Corporation developed an ARTS upgrade program known as common ARTS. Common ARTS is a replacement program for
ARTS-II and ARTS-III equipment reaching the end of its service life. Common
ARTS uses commercial off the shelf hardware and can be adapted to operate
with both analog and digital airport surveillance radar systems.
The common ARTS system uses new software that is compatible with
existing airport radar systems. Common ARTS is an expandable system that
can take up to fifteen inputs and drive as many as 200 individual display
units. It uses commercial displays called ARTS Color Display (ACD) units to
provide the controller with multicolor displays using a standard high resolution 20-inch video monitor. The ACD is similar to the color displays being
installed in air route traffic control centers as part of the DSR program. All
ARTS keyboard and trackball functions are displayed on the ACD; all the
information previously displayed on the auxiliary ARTS displays can be displayed on the ACD itself. The controller can modify and move information
using drop-down menus and windows similar to those used in personal computer graphical interfaces.

372 / CHAPTER 8
Common ARTS systems were installed at more than 140 sites including
New York, Dallas/Fort Worth, Chicago, Denver, Minneapolis, Atlanta, and the
Southern California Terminal Radar Approach Control facilities.
STARS

(FAA)

The standard terminal automation replacement system (STARS) is a new terminal air traffic control system that uses modern, commercial open architecture computing equipment to replace existing ARTS-IIA, ARTS-IIE, ARTS-IIIA,
and ARTS-IIIE systems. Over 200 systems for control towers, terminal radar
approach control facilities, and large consolidated TRACONs will eventually
be installed. This will involve the installation of over 1,700 individual controller workstations.
STARS is an all-digital air traffic control system composed of commercial
off the shelf hardware and commercially available software and interfaces with
existing ATC systems. It is a joint FAA/Department of Defense program to
replace ARTS and other older technology systems at over 200 FAA and DOD
terminal radar approach control facilities and associated towers.
The STARS installation includes 20x20-inch color displays with associated input devices, computers, and networks. STARS will provide the controller
with aircraft positional information with weather, flight data, and other ATCrelated information overlaid directly on the display console (see Figure 8–28).

Figure 8–28. STARS displays.

Theory and Fundamentals of Radar Operation

373

STARS uses commercial workstation computers connected to one another by
local area networks that provide controllers with color displays that include
controller-modifiable windows and graphics. STARS uses a standard graphical
user interface, thereby reducing the number of dials and knobs prevalent at
conventional controller workstations. The system can easily be adapted by the
programmer and/or the working controller. The workstations can also be easily reconfigured if sectors need to be combined or split. The STARS system is
capable of tracking up to 1,350 aircraft simultaneously and can accept inputs
from up to sixteen remote radar sites. This information can then be parsed out
and supplied to more than 100 different controller positions in over twenty
remote locations.
As of 2008, STARS systems were operational at forty-nine FAA TRACONs and fifty DOD sites. Although STARS was intended to replace ARTS
and common ARTS systems, the FAA has decided to defer replacement of those
systems until it can be determined which smaller terminal facilities, if any, might
best be consolidated into larger area facilities.
Radar Data
Processing

The radar data processing (RDP) system used in the ARTCCs was designed at
the same time as the flight data processing (FDP) system. Both systems make up
the National Airspace System stage A (NAS-A). The flight data portion of this
automation project was known as phase one. Phase two involved the automation of the RDP system, which was implemented in all ARTCCs in the continental United States in 1974. The total National Airspace System, when finally
completed, was considered the most complex computer system in existence in
the world at that time.
During initial development of the RDP system, components of the prototype ARTS were modified to provide alphanumeric information to the controllers at the Indianapolis ARTCC. This prototype system was known as the
stored program alphanumeric (SPAN) system. The development of SPAN was
successful, but interfacing the ARTS-type equipment with the long-range radars
used by the center was difficult. After experimenting with the SPAN system, the
FAA decided that a different system should be installed at the ARTCCs, and the
NAS-A system was developed.
Phase one of the National Airspace System program involved the installation of the FDP computer system, which was designed to provide automation
capability to:
Accept and store flight plan information.
Print and distribute flight plan information in the form of flight progress
strips.
Calculate and update flight plan data such as estimated time over specific
intersections and estimated arrival time at the destination airport.
Transfer flight plan data automatically from one sector to the next within any
particular ARTCC, from one ARTCC to the adjacent ARTCC, and from
ARTCCs to FDIO-equipped control towers and TRACONs.

374 / CHAPTER 8
The second phase of the automation process was the completion of the
RDP system, which provides for:
Radar input from multiple radar sites
Radar mosaic capability
Computer validation and selection of the most accurate data for display to the
controller
Automatic aircraft tracking
Visual display of flight information, both on the radar display and on auxiliary
cathode ray tube displays
Automatic radar handoff capabilities

Radar data processing as performed by the RDP system is a fairly complex
process because every center may be equipped with many different primary
and secondary radar systems that may be located hundreds of miles away. The
data’s accuracy must be verified and then converted into a format that can be
transmitted long distances without inducing any errors. Once the data enter
the main computer system, they must be sorted, merged with the data gathered
from other radar sites, and then routed to as many as 100 different displays
and input/output devices. In the RDP system, the FAA installed a radar data
acquisition and transfer (RDAT) system at each of the remote radar sites. The
RDAT system determines each aircraft’s position using information received by
the primary and secondary surveillance radar systems and routes this information to the common digitizer (CD).
The common digitizer is a digital radar processor that receives data
from the radar site, checks the information to determine its validity, and
converts the target echoes into a digital format. The CD divides the radar’s
area of coverage into range cells of approximately 1 square mile. The CD
determines the position of each aircraft and establishes in which range cell
the aircraft is located. As the radar completes each scan of the horizon, the
CD determines each aircraft’s altitude and transponder code and transmits
the information to the appropriate ARTCC using a digital communications
system.
Once received at the ARTCC, the radar data are electronically split, with
identical data sent to the central computer complex (CCC), which is the heart
of the RDP system, and the enhanced discrete address radar channel (EDARC),
which is the backup computer system.
As originally designed, the CCC was an IBM 9020 computer. The IBM
9020s were initially installed in the early 1970s. As air traffic increased, however, these computers were unable to keep up and were replaced with IBM
3083 computers, known as host computers. The host computer was replaced
by the host and oceanic computer system replacement (HOCSR), which is the
primary device used in the RDP system and is also known as the CCC or the
prime channel.

Theory and Fundamentals of Radar Operation

375

The HOCSR computer accepts the digital input transmitted from each
radar site and correlates these data with the flight plan information stored
in the FDP computer. The HOCSR then correlates the radar-derived position
information with the appropriate fight plan information using the aircraft’s
transponder code. If more than one radar site is tracking a particular aircraft,
the host computer determines which radar site is providing the most accurate
data and then uses the information sent from that site. The unused data transmitted from other sites are temporarily stored.
For the RDP system to function properly, every aircraft within a particular ARTCC’s area must be operating on a different transponder code. If
two aircraft squawk the same code, the host computer will be unable to determine which is valid and will be unable to correlate properly. Since there is an
insufficient number of available codes to issue a different transponder code to
every aircraft, these codes are automatically assigned to each aircraft according to procedures contained in the National Beacon Code Allocation Plan
(NBCAP).
The central computer complex correlates each aircraft’s position and altitude with the flight data information (i.e., aircraft type, route of flight, navigation equipment) stored in the FDP computer. The host computer then plots the
aircraft’s current position, direction of flight, and ground speed and forwards
this information to every affected control sector for display. The computer
also calculates the aircraft’s future position and altitude based on historical
data. This track is very useful for predicting potential conflicts or for displaying the aircraft’s predicted position whenever radar contact is temporarily
interrupted.
The display information is routed to every sector workstation using a
computer display channel (CDC), which in turn routes the appropriate information to each controller’s display (see Figure 8–29). The information displayed is not truly primary or secondary radar echoes; instead it is an electronic
representation of radar-derived data.
Display
System
Replacement

The Display System Replacement (DSR) program replaces 30-year-old radar
displays, used by en route air traffic controllers, with modern computer-like
color displays similar to those used by STARS. DSR supports more than 200
workstations and sixty-five sectors of airspace in each ARTCC. DSR receives
aircraft track information, weather, and other data from the primary ARTCC
computer and formats them locally for display to controllers. DSR provides not
only aircraft position and identification but can also display current messages
and lists, flight plan data, and color weather information as well.
DSR replaces the old monochrome circular displays with a console that
includes a 20x20-inch high-resolution computer display. DSR uses a standard
graphical user interface and is considered an “open architecture” system, meaning that components of the system are commercially based and should be easily maintained or replaced in the future without having to replace the entire
system.

FAA

376 / CHAPTER 8

Figure 8-29. Display
system replacement
systems.

The major components of DSR are the radar (or “R-side”) position console, which includes a color display, trackball, and keyboard. The data (or
“D-side”) position console includes a 15-inch display, flight strip printer and
bays, and a keyboard. An identical assistant (or “A-side”) position console can
also be installed if needed.
The DSR display differs from the older system in that raw primary and
secondary radar targets and ground clutter are not displayed. The HOCSR
filters out this information and simply displays the information requested by
the controller. In general, the only aircraft displayed are IFR or VFR aircraft
operating within the confines of the sector and VFR aircraft that do not have
transponders or do not have altitude-encoding transponders. The VFR targets can be removed from the display whenever they begin to obscure IFR
targets.
User Request
Evaluation
Tool

User request evaluation tool (URET) is a decision support system installed at
each en route controller workstation that assists the controller in determining
potential conflicts between two aircraft and in testing trial routes for possible
conflicts. URET displays electronic flight information in both a graphical and a

377

FAA

Theory and Fundamentals of Radar Operation

Figure 8–30. URET text display.

tabular display and has essentially replaced many of the functions of the written flight strips (see Figure 8–30).
URET operates in the background, monitoring aircraft progress and correlating it with stored flight plan information. The system predicts flight paths
based on both known and derived flight information. The system looks ahead
in four dimensions (the fourth dimension being time), taking into account aircraft performance and preassigned flight paths. This is called trajectory modeling. URET uses trajectory modeling to continuously detect potential conflicts
between aircraft as well as between aircraft and special use airspace. When
identified, URET provides alerts to controllers up to 20 minutes in advance of
the potential conflict. The controller then determines corrective action. URET
also allows controllers to conduct “what if” scenarios, called trial planning,
to determine the consequences of any potential change in an aircraft’s flight
plan route.
The controller interface to this capability is through both text and graphic
displays. The text-based aircraft list and plans display helps manage current
flight plan information, trial plan information, and conflict data. The graphic
plan display provides a graphic view of aircraft routes and altitudes, predicted
conflicts, and results of trial flight plan changes. The point-and-click interface
enables quick access to every system function and rapid entry of flight plan
data. The trial planning function enables the controller to check a desired flight
plan amendment for potential conflicts before a clearance is issued. Once the
controller is satisfied that the new flight plan is acceptable, an amendment to
the aircraft’s flight plan can be made with the click of a button.
ERAM

The en route automation modernization (ERAM) system is designed to replace
current computers and displays and is now being installed in selected ARTCCs.
ERAM is designed as a modular system that will provide controllers with all
the functionality of the current system but will be easily upgraded as the ATC
system transitions to NextGen.

378 / CHAPTER 8

FAA

ERAM will make both radar data and flight plan information currently
residing in the ATC system available to every controller. Controllers will be
able to share and coordinate information between centers and between centers and towers. Increased surveillance accuracy will enable 3-mile rather than
5-mile en route separation. Handoffs will be performed in a more automatic
way than today.
ERAM will make it possible to upgrade the NAS system as new innovations become available. The system software will initially provide the same
features as currently exist but will be based on an open architecture/language
permitting easier upgrading in the future.
One of the first enhancements planned for ERAM is end-to-end, fourdimensional trajectory modeling that predicts the path of each aircraft in time
and space from departure to arrival airport. As flight operations transition from
today’s ground-based radar to ADS-B technology, aircraft will be able to fly
more flexible and efficient routes without overloading the ATC system. ADS-B

Figure 8–31. A DSR display.

Theory and Fundamentals of Radar Operation

379

should also enable closer spacing of aircraft, reducing en route separation from
5 to 3 nautical miles matching that available in the terminal environment.
ERAM software and hardware will be upgraded in phases, with early
installation having begun in 2009, followed by enhancements each year. Some
of the advanced capabilities planned by the FAA include the integration of
weather data into trajectory modeling; enhanced conflict predication and resolution; a data link that provides more secure and accurate communications;
and airspace flexibility functions that will dynamically adjust airways, airspace
and sectors in real time to meet changing traffic needs.
Enhanced
Back-Up
Surveillance

The Enhanced Back-Up Surveillance (EBUS) system replaced the Direct Access
Radar Channel (DARC) system, which was used as the backup system at
domestic ARTCCs. EBUS uses components from the microprocessor en route
automated radar tracking system (MEARTS) application to provide backup
radar data processing services. MEARTS is an FAA modification to the original
ARTS equipment that offloads much of the software functions of ATC to individual microprocessor-based workstations instead on one central computer.
EBUS provides controllers with all the tracking and display functions of
the prime operating system as well as NEXRAD weather data. EBUS has all the
functionality of the primary radar system but does not have automated flight
data processing (flight strip) capability.

Center Radar
ARTS
Presentation

Center radar ARTS presentation (CENRAP) is a computer system used as
a backup for airport surveillance radar. The program, used at airports equipped
with ARTS systems, can provide ARTCC radar positioning information for
display to the controllers via the ARTS. CENRAP can be used if the airport
surveillance radar is unavailable. It is typically not as accurate as the main
radar, since the ARTCC data may be derived from a radar site quite a distance
from the main airport.

KEY TERMS
air route surveillance radar
(ARSR)
air traffic control radar beacon
system (ATCRBS)
aircraft list and plans display
airport surface detection
equipment (ASDE)
airport surveillance radar
(ASR)
altitude filtering
antenna
ARTS-II
ARTS-III

ARTS-IIIA
associated tracks
automated handoff
automated radar terminal system
(ARTS)
backup channel
beacon data acquisition system
(BDAS)
beacon slash
beacon tracking level (BTL)
blind speed
blip
boresight

center radar ARTS presentation
(CENRAP)
central computer complex (CCC)
challenge pulse
circular polarization (CP)
clutter map
coast
coast list
common ARTS
common digitizer (CD)
computer display channel
(CDC)
Conflict Alert

380 / CHAPTER 8
Conflict Alert IFR/VFR Mode C
Intruder
continuous wave (CW) radar
data acquisition subsystem (DAS)
data block
data entry and display subsystem
(DEDS)
data entry sets (DES)
data processing subsystem (DPS)
decenter
defruiter
display system replacement
double bloomer
duplexer
echo
en route ARTS (EARTS)
en route automation
modernization (ERAM)
feedhorn
flight data processing (FDP)
framing pulse
fruit
gain
Geo-Map
graphic plan display
gray scale
ground clutter
history
host and oceanic computer
system replacement
(HOCSR)
Ident
identification friend or foe (IFF)
joint surveillance system (JSS)
linear polarization (LP)
main bang
microprocessor en route
automated radar tracking
system (MEARTS)

minimum safe altitude warning
(MSAW)
mode
moving target detection (MTD)
moving target indicator (MTI)
MTI gate
MTI/MTD video gain
National Airspace System stage A
(NAS-A)
National Beacon Code Allocation
Plan (NBCAP)
noise
normal video gain
no transgression zone (NTZ)
plan position indicator (PPI)
precision approach radar (PAR)
precision runway monitor (PRM)
PRF stagger
prime channel
pulse repetition frequency
(PRF)
pulse repetition rate
pulse train
pulse-type radar
radar
radar and beacon tracking level
(RBTL) system
radar cross section
radar data acquisition and
transfer (RDAT)
radar data acquisition system
(RDAS)
radar data processing (RDP)
radar mile
radar mosaic
radar scope
radial velocity
range cells
range mark

range select switch
receiver
receiver gain
reply
sensitivity time control (STC)
side lobe suppression (SLS)
side lobe suppression
omnidirectional antenna
side lobes
special identification pulse (SIP)
squawking
Standby
standard terminal automation
replacement system (STARS)
stored program alphanumeric
(SPAN)
sweep
sweep decenter
tangential track
target
target coast
target illumination
ten-channel selector
threshold
track
track drops
trackball
traffic collision avoidance system
(TCAS)
traffic information service (TIS)
trajectory modeling
transmitter
transponder
trial planning
unassociated track
video map
video map intensity
video map selector
waveguide

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. What is the function of the radar transmitter, feedhorn, antenna, and receiver?
2. What is the difference between primary and secondary radar?
3. How is ground clutter removed from a radar display?
4. How is weather removed from a radar display?
5. What can controllers use radar for?
6. How does the use of radar make the air traffic control system more efficient?
7. What types of computerized radar systems does the FAA currently use and how do
they differ?

9
Radar Separation
Checkpoints
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Identify the methods of primary radar identiﬁcation.
2. Identify the methods of secondary radar identiﬁcation.
3. Explain the differences between the uses for handoffs and point outs.
4. Explain the difference between transfer of control and transfer of
communications.
5. Explain the three methods of separating aircraft using radar.
6. Understand the use of radar for instrument approaches.
7. Explain the signiﬁcance and the purpose of the approach gate.
8. Explain the use of the various automation tools available to the controller.

382 / CHAPTER 9
Radar can be used more efficiently to separate aircraft than nonradar separation techniques and can also be used to provide additional ATC services to
pilots. In general, radar is used by controllers to provide the following services
to pilots:
Aircraft identification and location
Aircraft separation
Navigation assistance
Instrument approaches
Traffic advisories
Unsafe condition alerts

Aircraft Identiﬁcation
Within certain limitations, radar can be used to easily locate and establish the
identity of any aircraft, whether IFR or VFR, with a pilot who is requesting air
traffic control services. Since any particular radar system is capable of displaying hundreds of radar targets at any given time, the controller must be absolutely certain of a particular aircraft’s identity prior to offering radar service
to that pilot. Failure to identify a target when using radar creates an obvious
safety hazard. If, for instance, a controller provided navigational assistance to
the wrong aircraft, the instructions might cause the pilot to become disoriented
or might cause the aircraft to crash into terrain or into another aircraft.
An aircraft must be positively identified using either the primary or the
secondary radar system. Since each identification method has potential drawbacks, it is in the controller’s and pilot’s best interest to use multiple methods
when identifying an aircraft using radar.
Primary
Radar
Identification

Primary radar identification methods are usually employed when the aircraft in
question is not equipped with a transponder or when the transponder is inoperative or operating intermittently. Because primary radar identification methods are fairly imprecise, secondary surveillance radar identification techniques
should be used whenever possible.
The easiest method for identifying an aircraft using primary surveillance
radar is to observe an aircraft that has just departed from an airport. Since
only one aircraft can depart from a runway at any given time, it can be safely
assumed that a departing target observed within 1 nautical mile of the departure end of the runway is positively identified. This method of identification is
not without its liabilities, however. The controller should be particularly cautious if the airport is constructed with parallel runways or intersecting runways
that have departure ends located close to each other, as two aircraft departing
from separate runways at approximately the same time could be misidentified.
The controller should also be aware of other traffic in the vicinity of the runway

Radar Separation

/

383

that might appear to be a departing aircraft. This traffic might include aircraft remaining in the traffic pattern or even large vehicles traveling near the
airport.
A second method of identifying an aircraft using primary radar requires
the pilot to report over a point with the exact location known by the controller and displayed on the radar screen. Possible locations include airway
intersections, prominent terrain features, or nearby cities or towns. If the controller observes a single target located over one of these landmarks, positive
identification of that aircraft can be presumed. The controller should use caution when pilots report over highways, rivers, or large cities, because these
are not precise locations. In addition, the controller should always consider
that the pilot might be unsure of the aircraft’s exact location when making
initial contact with the controller. Highways, rivers, and towns can easily be
misidentified by the pilot.
A third method of identifying a primary target using radar is to request
that the pilot turn the aircraft to a particular heading and then observe which
blip on the radar performs the proper turn. To ensure that this procedure results
in identification of the correct aircraft, the controller must:
Issue the pilot a turn that differs by at least 30° from the current heading of the
aircraft. Since pilots routinely make turns of 10° to 20° during the course of a
flight, a 30° turn is sufficient to positively identify an aircraft. Because there is
always the possibility of misidentification, controllers using this method should
routinely request that the aircraft make a series of two or more turns before
confirming the aircraft’s identification.
Ensure that the aircraft is not located on or near any IFR or VFR routes where
a turn similar to that issued might routinely be performed by aircraft.
Ensure that the unidentified aircraft is actually within the range of the radar
system. Any turn issued to an aircraft not observed on the radar display might
actually head that aircraft in a dangerous direction.
Ensure that only one aircraft is observed performing the assigned turns.
Although prohibited by the FARs, it is not implausible for the pilot of one
aircraft to perform turns issued to another aircraft. This could occur because
of garbled radio communications or because the pilot mistakenly responds
to a transmission meant for another aircraft.

Secondary
Surveillance
Radar
Identiﬁcation

More accurate methods of positively identifying aircraft can be provided by the
secondary surveillance radar system. Because of their accuracy, in most cases,
it is preferable to use these methods to determine an aircraft’s identity.
The most common method of secondary surveillance radar identification
is use of the Ident feature included in the transponder. When the pilot presses
the Ident button, the transponder transmits a special identification pulse (SIP)
to the ATCRBS receiver on the ground, which interprets the SIP and causes the
radar to display a double-width beacon slash on the PPI. Since the special identification pulse is the only method by which this double-width slash is typically
produced, the use of the Ident feature provides accurate, positive identification

384 / CHAPTER 9
Transponder code

Function switch

TST

l

ALT

2

0

0

ON
IDENT
S

Ident button
Selector knobs

Figure 9–1. A light-aircraft transponder.

of an aircraft. This method is not without its shortcomings, however, since
overlapping transponder returns from two aircraft can be interpreted by the
ATCRBS receiver as an Ident. In addition, there is always the chance of miscommunication with a pilot, causing the pilot of an unintended aircraft to
mistakenly send an Ident signal.
A second method of aircraft identification using the secondary surveillance
radar system requires the pilot to switch the transponder from the On position
to the Standby position (see Figure 9–1). When this is done, the transponder
remains on but will no longer respond to interrogations from the ATCRBS
transmitter on the ground. Once set to Standby, the transponder beacon slash
on the PPI disappears, with only the primary radar target remaining. When the
controller is certain that the beacon slash has disappeared from the radar display, the pilot is requested to return the transponder to the On position. Caution should be used when employing this technique, as many factors can cause
the beacon slash to temporarily disappear from the PPI. For example, transient
malfunctions in the ATCRBS equipment on the ground or on the aircraft may
temporarily cause the beacon slash to disappear, and initiating a turn of the
aircraft toward the radar antenna may temporarily shield the airborne transponder antenna, resulting in a loss of the beacon slash on the PPI. Therefore,
whenever a controller uses this radar identification technique, the beacon slash
must disappear for a sufficient time interval to ensure that the transponder has
in fact been switched to the Standby position.
If the controller is using beacon decoding equipment that can display the
aircraft’s transponder code directly on the PPI, the controller can positively
identify an aircraft by requesting that the pilot select a specific transponder
code. This is accomplished by requesting that the pilot “squawk” a particular
code (e.g., “Falcon six two mike squawk two one four five”). Once the pilot
has placed the assigned code into the transponder, it can be displayed directly
on the PPI.
When using this technique, the controller must be aware of some of its possible limitations. If the pilot has not turned the transponder to the On position, it
will not reply to the ATCRBS interrogation regardless of the code that has been
selected. In addition, many transponders require a few minutes to warm up.

Radar Separation

/

385

If the pilot has just turned the transponder on, it may not reply to an interrogation
for a number of minutes, even if the proper code has been selected.
If the controller is using a computerized secondary surveillance radar
system that can generate a full data block on the PPI, the acquisition and display of this data block may be used to positively identify an aircraft. Once the
controller has entered the aircraft’s identification and transponder code into
the computer, the display of the aircraft’s data block on the PPI can occur only
if the proper transponder code has been received by the radar system. Thus, it
can be safely assumed that the acquisition and display of the aircraft’s identity
on the PPI is evidence that the aircraft is squawking the proper transponder
code (see Figure 9–2).
All radar identification techniques depend on clear, concise communication between the controller and pilot. If the controller issues an improper
instruction or if the wrong pilot reacts to an instruction, mistaken identification
could result. It is for this reason that a combination of primary and secondary
surveillance radar techniques should be used whenever a controller is identifying an aircraft.
Loss or Termination of Radar Contact Once an aircraft has been identified,
the pilot is informed through the use of the phrase “radar contact.” A controller’s use of this phrase informs the pilot that radar identification has been

Figure 9–2. ARTS data tag (FAA).

386 / CHAPTER 9
established and that radar services can now be provided. If radar identification
is subsequently lost, the controller informs the pilot using the phrase “radar
contact lost.” This phrase advises the pilot that the controller can no longer
identify the aircraft using radar and that radar services are no longer being provided. In addition, this phrase means that if the aircraft is operating on an IFR
flight plan, the controller will separate the aircraft using nonradar separation
methods. Before the controller can begin to offer radar services to an aircraft
whose “radar contact” has been lost, he or she must reidentify the aircraft using
one of the previously described methods.
If at any time during the flight either the controller or the pilot chooses to
discontinue radar service to the aircraft, the pilot is informed using the phrase
“radar service terminated.” This phrase is most commonly used when a radarequipped facility hands off an IFR aircraft to a nonradar facility or when a VFR
aircraft reaches the outer limit of a facility’s radar coverage area.
Altitude Verification Before using a mode C–generated altitude readout for
aircraft separation, the controller must verify that the transponder onboard the
aircraft is operating correctly and transmitting the proper altitude information.
This verification can be accomplished in one of two ways:
The altitude displayed on the radar must vary by less than 300 feet from the
pilot’s verbally reported altitude.
The controller must observe a continuous altitude readout from an aircraft
departing from an airport, and that altitude must vary by less than 300 feet
from the airport elevation.

Invalid Mode C Operation Whenever the altitude readout from a transponder
varies from that reported by the pilot, the controller must request that the pilot
confirm the proper operation of both transponder and altimeter. The most likely
cause of the problem is a malfunctioning altitude encoder, but it is also possible that the pilot missed the aircraft’s altimeter, resulting in the aircraft actually flying at the wrong altitude. The phraseology to verify correct transponder
operation is “Cessna one mike lima, verify altitude and altimeter setting.”
If the pilot reports that both the altimeter setting in use and the indicated
altitude are correct, the mode C equipment on the aircraft is assumed to be
malfunctioning and should be turned off. In this case, the controller should
inform the pilot and request that the transponder be readjusted to operate on
mode A (nonaltitude reporting): “Cessna one mike lima, stop altitude squawk,
altitude differs by five hundred feet.”

Transfer of Radar Identiﬁcation
Once an aircraft has initially been radar identified by a controller, subsequent
controllers need not repeat any of the radar identification procedures as long
as the identification has not been terminated and has been continuously

Radar Separation

/

387

maintained and transferred to each subsequent controller. The transfer of radar
identification from one controller to the next is extremely important, ensuring
efficiency of the air traffic control system. If an aircraft’s radar identification is
lost just prior to or during a handoff, subsequent controllers must use nonradar
techniques to separate that aircraft until its radar identification can be reestablished. Nonradar separation procedures inefficiently use existing airspace, and
the reidentification of aircraft consumes an inordinate amount of the subsequent controller’s time and concentration.
Because the transfer of radar identification is so important to the operation of the ATC system, the FAA has developed standardized procedures and
terminology that should be used when transferring aircraft identification. The
following standard definitions and terminology are excerpted from the FAA
handbook:

Handoff
Procedures

Handoff

An action taken to transfer the radar identification
of an aircraft from one controller to another if the
aircraft will enter the receiving controller’s airspace
and radio communications with the aircraft will also be
transferred.

Radar contact

The term used to inform the controller initiating the
handoff that the aircraft has been identified and approval
is granted for the aircraft to enter the receiving controller’s
airspace.

Point out

An action taken by a controller to transfer the radar
identification of an aircraft to another controller if
the aircraft will or may enter the airspace of another
controller and radio communications with the aircraft will
not be transferred.

Point out approved

The term used to inform the controller requesting
the point out that the aircraft has been identified and
that approval is granted for the aircraft to enter the
receiving controller’s airspace, without a transfer of radio
communication.

Traffic

Term used to transfer radar identification of an aircraft
to another controller for the purpose of coordinating
another action. “Traffic” is typically issued in response
to a handoff or a point out and is used to identify other
aircraft that may become a factor in aircraft separation.

Traffic observed

Term used to inform the controller issuing traffic
information that the traffic is identified and that any
restrictions issued concerning that aircraft will be
complied with.

Positive radar identification must be transferred from one controller to the next
whenever an aircraft traverses the boundary between air traffic control sectors.
The first controller known as the transferring controller, is responsible for
ensuring that controllers and pilots comply with the following requirements:

388 / CHAPTER 9
The handoff must be concluded before the aircraft crosses the sector boundary.
An aircraft is not permitted to cross a boundary between two sectors without
the knowledge and the permission of the receiving controller.
During the handoff, the aircraft must be radar identified by the receiving
controller. (This may be accomplished using any of the previously described
methods.)
The transfer of communication must be accomplished before the aircraft crosses
the sector boundary. This permits the receiving controller to be in radio contact
with the pilot prior to the aircraft crossing the sector boundary. The receiving
controller may not issue any clearance that will change the aircraft’s route of
flight or altitude while it is still within the transferring controller’s sector.
The receiving controller’s approval must be received before the aircraft crosses
the sector boundary. Verbal communication is typically accomplished using
intrafacility intercom or leased telephone circuits. Automated handoffs are
accomplished using ARTS or NAS-A computer equipment.
Potential traffic conflicts must be resolved prior to the transfer of
communication.
Both controllers must comply with the procedures specified in applicable letters
of agreement or facility directives. These procedures include those for preferred
routes and altitudes and radio frequency assignments.
Unless expressly negotiated between the involved controllers, the transfer of
control occurs at the sector boundary.
The transferring controller must comply with any restrictions issued by the
receiving controller.

Before accepting a handoff, the receiving controller must comply with the following rules:
The aircraft being transferred must be radar identified.
The controller must agree that the aircraft can be safely accepted and that
separation must be provided.
Any applicable restrictions regarding that aircraft must be communicated to the
transferring controller.
The receiving controller must comply with all of the procedures specified in the
applicable letters of agreement or facility directives.
The receiving controller is not permitted to change the altitude, heading, speed,
or transponder code of the aircraft until it crosses the sector boundary. The
transferring controller is still responsible for separating the aircraft until it has
crossed the sector boundary and assumes that the aircraft will comply with
the clearance that was in effect before the handoff occurred. If the receiving
controller needs to alter the aircraft’s route or altitude before it crosses the
sector boundary, permission must be received from the transferring controller
before the clearance is issued to the pilot.

Any of these conditions may be altered upon the consent of both controllers.
This process of negotiating and granting permission for these changes is known
as effecting coordination. Here is an example of handoff phraseology:

Radar Separation

Point Out
Procedures

/

389

TRANSFERRING CONTROLLER:

Handoff, Delta two eleven, seven miles east of
Kelly, seven thousand.

RECEIVING CONTROLLER:

Delta two eleven, radar contact.

In instances in which an aircraft may cross a number of sector boundaries in a
short time, it may not be efficient or practical to require that the pilot contact
every responsible controller. Since some of the controllers may be in contact
with the aircraft only briefly and may need to initiate a new handoff immediately after accepting the aircraft, it may be more efficient for the first controller
to let the aircraft enter the second and the third controllers’ airspace but to
receive permission to transfer the aircraft’s communication directly to the third
controller. The second controller is advised of the aircraft’s position and
approves the aircraft’s entry into the sector but waives the requirement to communicate with the aircraft. This sequence of events is known as a point out.
During a point out, the second controller remains responsible for the
separation of the aircraft as it traverses through his or her sector but agrees
not to communicate with the aircraft. The first controller is required to receive
permission to traverse the second controller’s airspace and must also hand off
the aircraft to the third controller. This procedure is most advantageous when
the aircraft enters the fringes of the second controller’s airspace and remains
there for only a short time.
In the example of a point out shown in Figure 9–3, the aircraft traverses
sectors alpha, bravo, and charlie. Since the aircraft will be in bravo sector only

Alpha sector

Bravo sector

Charlie sector

Aircraft
under control
of sector charlie
communicates
with sector charlie
Aircraft
under control
of sector alpha
communicates
with sector alpha

Aircraft
under control
of sector bravo
still communicates
with sector alpha

Rou
te of

fligh
t

Figure 9–3. An example of a point out. The alpha sector controller points out the
aircraft to the bravo sector while effecting a handoff with the charlie sector.

390 / CHAPTER 9
briefly, the transferring controller (controller alpha) chooses to point out the
aircraft to the bravo controller while coordinating a handoff with the charlie
sector controller. During a point out, the transferring controller (controller
alpha) must adhere to the following rules:
Permission from the bravo sector controller must be received before the aircraft
enters bravo sector. The bravo controller is not obligated to approve the point
out and may insist on communicating with the aircraft. If this occurs, the point
out with the bravo sector controller becomes a handoff.
The bravo sector controller may stipulate restrictions to be placed on the
aircraft while it is in bravo sector.
The bravo sector controller may also identify potentially conflicting traffic to
the transferring controller (controller alpha), and the alpha sector controller
must comply with any restrictions.
The aircraft’s altitude, heading, speed, or transponder code may not be altered
while it is within the bravo sector.
The alpha sector controller is responsible for initiating the handoff with
controller charlie. This controller must advise the charlie sector controller that
approval for the point out has been received from the bravo sector controller,
and any restrictions placed on the aircraft by the bravo controller must be
conveyed.

During a point out, the bravo sector controller is responsible for:
Ensuring that every aircraft within bravo sector is separated from the aircraft
being pointed out.
Issuing appropriate instructions to the alpha sector controller to ensure that the
aircraft remains separated.

The charlie sector controller accepts the handoff directly from the alpha controller and must comply with any restriction imposed by either the alpha or the
bravo sector controller.

Basic Radar Separation
At most medium- or high-activity air traffic control facilities, radar is used
by the controllers as a supplemental tool to separate aircraft—it does not
completely replace nonradar separation procedures. It does, however, permit
a reduction of lateral and longitudinal separation minima and increases the
efficiency and effectiveness of the controller. There are still many occasions
when a radar-equipped facility will use nonradar separation procedures in lieu
of a radar procedure. In some cases, nonradar methods may be easier to apply
and do not significantly restrict the pilot or reduce ATC system efficiency. In
many areas, radar coverage does not extend as far as the FAA would like, and
nonradar procedures are still used to separate aircraft. In addition, some FAA

Radar Separation

/

391

air traffic control facilities remain unequipped with radar and must rely on
nonradar procedures.
But in most cases, use of radar increases ATC system efficiency, reduces
controller workload, and enhances safety. When using radar, controllers can
visualize the position of each aircraft, permitting most separation standards
to be reduced. Radar also permits the controller to issue headings to pilots to
more effectively use the airspace. In most cases, the routine use of holding patterns has been virtually eliminated through the use of radar. Lost aircraft can
be assisted, pilots can be warned of nearby traffic, and instrument approaches
can be conducted solely through the use of radar.
Radar is most commonly used by controllers to reduce the separation
interval between aircraft participating in the air traffic control system. Controllers are not obligated to use radar separation procedures exclusively, however.
If a nonradar separation method is more efficient or easier to apply in a particular situation, the controller is free to use nonradar procedures.
Separation
Standards

Radar separation criteria are defined in much the same way as nonradar separation criteria. Separate procedures and criteria are used when applying vertical, lateral, longitudinal, or initial separation of aircraft. As when using nonradar
procedures, the controller needs to apply only one of these methods of separation to any particular aircraft.
Vertical Separation Vertical separation procedures for radar controllers are
similar to those used by nonradar controllers. Both must keep aircraft vertically
separated by a minimum of 1,000 feet and aircraft operating above FL 410
separated by a minimum of 2,000 feet. An exception occurs when two aircraft
are either climbing or descending. In such instances, the following aircraft can
be assigned the altitude vacated by the previous aircraft once the pilot reports
leaving that altitude, or if the controller observes a valid mode C indication that
the first aircraft has passed through that altitude.
Prior to 2005, vertical separation between high-altitude aircraft was
1,000 feet for aircraft operating at or below FL 290 and 2,000 feet for aircraft
operating above FL 290. This increased separation was required due to the
inherent inaccuracy of aneroid (barometric) altimeters operating at such high
altitudes (low pressures). In the late 1990s, improved altimetry that permitted
the use of 1,000 feet of vertical separation up to and including FL 410 was
developed. This new separation standard is known as reduced vertical separation minima (RVSM).
RVSM was first introduced in oceanic airspace. In 2005, RVSM was
introduced into domestic U.S. airspace and known as domestic reduced vertical
separation minima (DRVSM). Aircraft operating in DRVSM airspace must be
equipped with special RVSM-certified altimetry equipment. RVSM-equipped
aircraft can be vertically separated by 1,000 feet up to and including FL 410.
If a non-RVSM aircraft operates between FL 290 and FL 410, it must be separated from all other aircraft by at least 2,000 feet.

392 / CHAPTER 9
Aircraft operating above FL 410 must have a vertical separation of 2,000
feet whether or not it is RVSM-equipped. The only exceptions are as follows:
• In oceanic airspace, above FL 450, 4,000 feet of vertical separation is required
between a supersonic and any other aircraft.
• Military aircraft operating above FL 600 need to be vertically separated by
5,000 feet.

RVSM added six additional altitudes for use in the high-altitude en route
structure (flight levels 300, 320, 340, 360, 380, and 400), thereby increasing
airspace capacity and aircraft efficiency.
Not every country has converted to RVSM separation above FL 290. In
the United States, RVSM airspace is that which extends upward from FL 290
through FL 410 over the domestic United States, Alaska, the Gulf of Mexico
where the FAA provides air traffic services, the San Juan flight information
region, across international borders with Canada and Mexico, and the Pacific
and Atlantic Oceanic airspace controlled by the FAA.
In general, aircraft operating in RVSM airspace must be specially certified
in order to fly at these altitudes. Some non-RVSM capable aircraft are permitted
to operate in RVSM airspace, but only for specific reasons. These include nonRVSM capable DOD aircraft, aircraft being flown by manufacturers for development and certification, and foreign state-owned aircraft on official diplomatic
travel.
Longitudinal Separation After identifying the aircraft, the controller may use
radar to reduce the required longitudinal separation. As long as the minimum
longitudinal separation interval between each aircraft (usually 3–5 nautical
miles) can be maintained, longitudinal separation is presumed to exist. When
applying longitudinal separation using radar, the controller must measure the
distance using the following reference points, which vary depending on the type
of equipment operating on each aircraft:
If neither aircraft is transponder-equipped, the centers of the primary radar
targets are used to measure the distance between targets. In no situation should
the primary radar blips ever be permitted to overlap (see Figure 9–4).
If both aircraft are transponder-equipped, the distance between the targets is
measured from the ends of the beacon control slashes.
If only one aircraft is transponder-equipped, the distance between aircraft is
measured from the center of the primary target to the end of the beacon slash.
Controllers working at facilities equipped with all-digital displays should
measure the distance between the centers of the digitized targets. Under no
circumstances should the targets be permitted to touch (see Figure 9–5).

The basic longitudinal separation minimum is 3 nautical miles, but because the
width of the radar pulse increases as the pulse travels away from the antenna,
distant targets appear much larger on a radar display than those located closer

Radar Separation

0

350

340

10

/

393

20

330

30

320

40

310

50

Primary
targets

300
290

60
70

A

280

80

270

90

Primary
target

260
250

Primary
and
secondary
targets

Secondary
target

C

240

100
110
120

B

130

230
140

220
150

210
200

190

180

170

160

PPI

Figure 9–4. Target separation minima using a PPI display such as ARTS or STARS.

to the radar antenna. For this reason, the FAA has provided increased separation criteria for aircraft located more than 40 nautical miles from the radar
antenna. The longitudinal separation standards for controllers using radar are
(a) 3 nautical miles if both targets are located less than 40 nautical miles from
the radar antenna, and (b) 5 nautical miles if either aircraft is 40 or more nautical miles from the radar antenna (see Figure 9–6).
Whenever a radar data processing system such as NAS-A, STARS, or
EARTS (commonly known as a digital or mosaic radar system) is using more
than one radar site to create a radar mosaic, the controller is unable to determine which antenna is actually being used to locate any particular aircraft.
Because of atmospheric conditions, terrain obstructions, and general system
performance, it cannot always be assumed that the closest radar system is the
one actually being used to determine the aircraft’s position. For this reason, controllers using mosaic systems must always assume that each target is potentially

394 / CHAPTER 9

digitized targets

PVD

Figure 9–5. Target separation minima using a digital display (applicable to STARS,
DSR, or EARTS displays).

40 nautical miles or farther from the radar antenna and therefore must separate
every aircraft by a minimum of 5 nautical miles.
These longitudinal separation criteria do not offer sufficient protection
to a small aircraft behind or directly under and behind a larger aircraft. To
reduce the chance that the smaller aircraft may encounter damaging wake
turbulence, the FAA has mandated increased separation. The FAA handbook
states that whenever a smaller aircraft is following a larger aircraft at the same
altitude or 1,000 feet below it, the following longitudinal separation criteria
must be used:
Four nautical miles between a heavy aircraft following a heavy aircraft.
Five nautical miles between a small aircraft following a heavy aircraft.
Five nautical miles between a large aircraft following a heavy aircraft.

In addition, because of the increased risk of wake turbulence to small aircraft during the approach and landing phases of flight, the FAA has mandated
increased longitudinal separation when a small aircraft is landing behind a
larger aircraft (see Table 9–1). The handbook states that when a small aircraft

Radar Separation

340

0

350

10

/

395

20

330

30

320

40

310

50

300

60

5 n mi

290

70

280

80

270

90

3 n mi
10

260

100

20

250

110
5 n mi

30

240

120

40

230
220

130
140

50
150

210
200

190

180

170

160

PPI

Figure 9–6. Longitudinal radar separation.

is following a larger aircraft and is landing on the same runway, the following separation intervals must exist when the larger aircraft crosses the landing
threshold:
A small aircraft following an aircraft classified as large must be separated by
at least a 4-nautical-mile interval.
A small aircraft following an aircraft classified as heavy must be separated by
at least a 6-nautical-mile interval.

Lateral Separation Lateral separation minima applied in a radar environment
are similar to the longitudinal separation minima. One of the primary differences between the two is that wake turbulence avoidance is not a factor when

396 / CHAPTER 9
Table 9–1.

Wake Turbulence Minima (nautical miles of longitudinal separation)
En Route and Approach Separation

Separate aircraft operating directly behind, or directly behind and less than 1,000 feet
below, or following an aircraft conducting an instrument approach by the following
minima:
Leading Aircraft
Trailing Aircraft

Small

Large

Boeing 757

Heavy

Small

3

3

5

5

Large

3

3

4

5

Heavy

3

3

4

4

Note: A separation of 2.5 nautical miles is authorized between aircraft established
on the final approach course within 10 nanometer of the landing runway when the
leading aircraft's weight class is the same or less than the trailing aircraft. Heavy
aircraft and the Boeing 757 are permitted to participate in the separation reduction as
the trailing aircraft only, and the procedure is conducted at airports where the average
runway occupancy time is 50 seconds or less.
Landing Separation

Separate aircraft landing behind another aircraft on the same runway or one making
a touch-and-go, stop-and-go, or low approach by ensuring the following minima will
exist at the time the preceding aircraft is over the landing threshold:
Leading Aircraft
Trailing Aircraft

Small

Large

Boeing 757

Heavy

Small

3

4

5

6

Large

3

3

3

5

Heavy

3

3

3

4

Note: Parallel runways less than 2,500 feet apart are considered as a single runway
due to the possible effects of wake turbulence.

using lateral separation. The minimum lateral separation interval when using
radar is as follows
Three nautical miles if both targets are located less than 40 nautical miles from
the radar antenna.
Five nautical miles if either aircraft is 40 or more nautical miles from the radar
antenna.

Whenever a controller is using a radar system that creates a radar mosaic, the
controller must separate aircraft laterally by a minimum of 5 nautical miles.
An exception to the basic lateral separation rule can be made whenever two
aircraft are flying courses that diverge by at least 15° (see Figure 9–7). The FAA

Radar Separation

/

of flig
Route

ht

397

Minimum
of 15°

Route
of fligh
t

Figure 9–7. An example of lateral radar separation between two diverging targets.

handbook states that lateral separation can be presumed to exist between these
two aircraft when both of the following conditions exist:
Aircraft traveling in opposite directions have passed each other. Aircraft
traveling in the same general direction are assumed to be separated when their
projected courses have crossed one another.
Sufficient separation exists such that neither the primary targets nor the beacon
control slashes touch each other.

Whenever these conditions exist, the controller may discontinue the use
of either vertical or longitudinal separation.
Initial Separation of Departures Within a radar environment, lateral separation minima can be reduced when separating two aircraft departing from
the same airport. These reduced minima can be applied only to aircraft
whose courses will eventually diverge by at least 15°. (This differs from a
nonradar environment where the course divergence requirement is a minimum of 45°.)
If both aircraft are departing from the same runway and their courses will
diverge by at least 15° immediately after takeoff, a 1-mile separation interval
must be maintained (see Figure 9–8). If the two aircraft will not diverge immediately after takeoff, the controller must apply longitudinal, vertical, or visual
separation.
If two aircraft are departing from separate runways that do not intersect
and both the runways’ and the aircraft’s courses diverge by at least 15°, simultaneous departures are authorized with no separation interval (see Figure 9–9).
If the runways intersect but diverge by at least 15° and the aircraft’s
courses will diverge by at least 15°, the following aircraft can be authorized

398 / CHAPTER 9

1 mi

15° or more

Figure 9–8. Aircraft departing from the same runway and diverging immediately after
takeoff must be separated by at least 1 mile.

15° or more

Figure 9–9. Aircraft departing from different, nonintersecting runways that diverge
immediately after takeoff can be simultaneously departed.

to depart after the leading aircraft has crossed the runway intersection (see
Figure 9–10).
If the aircraft are operating from parallel runways that are separated by
at least 2,500 feet and the aircraft will fly diverging courses immediately after
takeoff, simultaneous departures are authorized (see Figure 9–11).
If none of the above conditions exist, the controller must separate the two
aircraft as if they were both departing from the same runway.

Radar Separation

/

399

15° or more

Figure 9–10. Aircraft departing from intersecting runways that diverge by at least 15°
can be departed once the first aircraft has passed through the intersection.

15° or more

2,500 ft. or more

Figure 9–11. Aircraft departing from parallel runways separated by at least
2,500 feet can be departed simultaneously if their courses will immediately diverge
by at least 15°.

Radar-Assisted Navigation
Radar is also used by controllers to assist pilots to navigate their aircraft. This
assistance can eliminate “dog legs” in the flight path and permit more efficient
airspace usage. Rerouting an aircraft using radar also permits the pilot to

400 / CHAPTER 9
bypass congested areas, thereby reducing or eliminating the use of holding patterns while en route. Finally, radar can be used to position aircraft directly on
the final approach course of an instrument approach, eliminating the need for
airspace-consuming procedure turns.
Controllers assisting a pilot to navigate issue verbal heading instructions
known as vectors. When vectoring an aircraft, the controller must instruct the
pilot to turn to a specific magnetic heading, to turn left or right a specific number of degrees, or simply to fly a particular heading. Here are some examples
of the phraseology used for issuing vectors:
Turn left heading [heading]
Turn right heading [heading]
Fly heading [heading]
Fly present heading
Turn [number of degrees] left
Turn [number of degrees] right
Depart [fix] heading [heading]

The controller should be aware of a number of factors that can influence the
phraseology used when issuing vectors. Since the winds aloft may significantly
affect the ground track of the aircraft, and since the controller can observe only
the ground track of an aircraft, potential crosswinds at the aircraft’s cruising
altitude must always be considered when assigning a heading. The controller
must also be alert to the fact that the aircraft’s heading indicator may be inaccurately set or might even be malfunctioning.
In consideration of these factors, the controller should instruct a pilot to
turn in a specific direction only when the controller is positive of the aircraft’s
current heading. Since pilots are required by the FARs to turn in the direction
requested by the controller even if it appears to be the “long way around,” an
incorrect direction of turn might produce unanticipated results. Although the
“long way around” technique can be used to properly sequence an aircraft
or to confine an aircraft to a specific area, controllers must use this technique
with discretion. Pilots are trained to immediately comply with a controller’s
request, and they often will initiate the turn and request later confirmation if
the vector seems inappropriate. In some situations, this request might be too
late to prevent the development of an unsafe condition. To prevent this situation, if the controller is unaware of an aircraft’s current heading, the pilot
should simply be instructed to “fly” a heading. Pilots interpret this instruction
to mean that the aircraft should be turned in whichever direction results in the
shortest turn.
Whenever a controller issues a vector to a pilot, it becomes an amendment
to the aircraft’s clearance. Since a vector is a change in the aircraft’s route of
flight, the controller is required to inform the pilot of the reason for the vector
and at which point or time the pilot can be expected to resume normal navigation. This information can be used by the pilot if either the controller’s or

Radar Separation

/

401

the aircraft’s communications system should fail. The proper phraseology for
vectoring an aircraft off its assigned route of flight is as follows:
N1234P, turn left heading three five zero, vector around traffic, expect to join
victor niner in one five miles.
UAL211, fly heading two seven zero, when able, proceed direct to the
Shelbyville VOR.
N321YT, turn right heading zero niner zero, vector for the ILS approach, expect
a turn on to the final approach course in one five miles.
AAL321, depart the Lansing VOR heading zero eight zero, vector for the ILS
runway two six left approach.
N555DM, turn two zero degrees left, vector around traffic, expect a vector
direct to the Pullman VOR in three five miles.
VV678, turn right heading three five zero, intercept victor three seventy-one.

Once the controller has issued a vector to the pilot, the controller is responsible for monitoring the progress of that aircraft until the pilot is able to reestablish normal navigation. If a possible misunderstanding concerning when the pilot
should resume normal navigation could occur, the phraseology “resume normal
navigation” should be used when the radar vector has terminated. To assist the
pilot in reorienting his or her aircraft at the conclusion of such a vector, the aircraft’s current location should always precede this instruction. For example:
N345MN, seven miles from the Knox VOR, resume normal navigation.
UAL556, two zero miles east of the Northbrook VOR, when able proceed direct
Badger.

While operating along a federal airway or an approved transition route or
during the conduct of an instrument approach, the pilot must comply with the
minimum altitudes provided on appropriate navigation charts. Once the aircraft
has been vectored off one of these published routes, however, it becomes the
controller’s responsibility to ensure that the aircraft remains safely above terrain
or local obstructions. To assist in this task, the FAA has developed minimum
vectoring altitudes and has provided these altitudes to controllers at every radarequipped facility (see Figure 9–12). The use of these altitudes is mandatory and
provides each aircraft with standard IFR separation from any terrain or obstacle.
In general, aircraft operating at minimum vectoring altitudes will remain at least
3 nautical miles laterally from or at least 1,000 feet above any obstruction.

Radar Arrivals and Approaches
Radar can also be used to expedite arrivals to the final approach course of an
instrument approach. Instead of requiring each aircraft to conduct a lengthy
procedure turn or enter a holding pattern before transitioning to the approach

402 / CHAPTER 9

N
013

348

5500
2500

057

5000
289

3000

277
1500
3500

3000
5

250

2000

102

10
3000
15
20
25
30

160

Figure 9–12. Sample minimum vectoring altitude chart.

(two of the techniques used in a nonradar environment), a radar controller can
vector each aircraft directly onto the final approach course. Since aircraft vectored onto the final approach course do not need—nor are they permitted by the
FARs to perform—a procedure turn, vectoring reduces the separation interval
between each aircraft while maximizing the use of the instrument approach.
Radar vectors to the final approach course also permit a controller to more
effectively manage the spacing of aircraft with dissimilar flight characteristics.
When vectoring an aircraft onto the final approach course, the controller must ensure that it is separated at all times. This task can be fairly difficult
since the controller is usually required to sequence aircraft with different flight
characteristics to the same final approach course. Even two identical aircraft
may not fly the approach at the same speed because of aircraft loading characteristics, pilot preferences, or any number of other variables unknown to the
controller.
Besides ensuring separation, the controller must ensure that the aircraft is
positioned such that the pilot can make a safe and gradual transition to the final
approach course. When the controller has assumed navigational responsibility
while vectoring for the instrument approach, each aircraft must be vectored

Radar Separation

/

403

Intercept
point

Final
approach
fix

Approach
gate

1 n mi

2 n mi

Figure 9–13. Approach gate and intercept point placement.

into the proper position and at an appropriate heading to ensure that the pilot
can safely transition to the final approach course. To facilitate this transition,
the FAA handbook specifies criteria that the controller must maintain during
this procedure.
Approach
Gate

The handbook specifies that an approach gate exists along every final approach
course whenever radar vectoring to that instrument approach is in progress (see
Figure 9–13). The approach gate is located either 1 nautical mile outside the
final approach fix or 5 nautical miles from the end of the runway, whichever
distance is greater. If the weather ceiling is lower than 500 feet above the minimum vectoring altitude or if the visibility at the airport is less than 3 nautical
miles, every aircraft vectored to the final approach course must intercept the
final approach course no less than 2 nautical miles outside the approach gate.
This requirement can be relaxed only if requested by the pilot, but in no case
may the aircraft be permitted to intercept the final approach course inside the
final approach fix.
The controller must also ensure that the aircraft intercepts the final
approach course at a sufficiently shallow angle to permit a smooth transition to
the final approach course. The FAA handbook specifies that if the aircraft will
intercept the final approach course at a point less than 2 miles from the approach
gate, the intercept angle should be less than or equal to 20°. If the aircraft will
intercept the final approach course 2 miles or farther from the approach gate,
the aircraft may intercept the final approach course at an angle no greater than
30° (see Figure 9–14).

Arrival
Instructions

To provide for pilot preplanning during vectors to an instrument approach, the
controller is required to inform the pilot of the aircraft’s position and the

404 / CHAPTER 9

20°
Runway
2 n mi
Final
approach
fix

30°

Approach
gate

Figure 9–14. Proper intercept angle for aircraft intercepting the final approach course.

altitude to be maintained during the vector. The following information must be
issued to the pilot before the aircraft intercepts the final approach course:
The aircraft’s position relative to a fix associated with the instrument approach.
This fix is usually the final approach fix but may be any other navaid or
intersection along the final approach course.
The pilot must be issued a vector that will cause the aircraft to intercept the
final approach course at the proper point and at an allowable intercept angle.
The controller must give the pilot clearance to conduct the instrument
approach.
If the aircraft is not on a published transition route to the final approach course,
the controller must assign the aircraft an altitude that is no lower than the
minimum vectoring altitude. The aircraft must remain at or above this altitude
until it is established on a published segment of the instrument approach.
The controller should issue instructions to contact the next controller, if
appropriate, and the frequency to be used.

Here are examples of phraseology that would be used for the situations depicted
in Figures 9–15 and 9–16.
United three eleven, seven miles from Vagey, turn right heading zero two zero,
intercept the final approach course at or above two thousand seven hundred,
cleared for the ILS runway four approach. Monitor Minneapolis tower on one
two six point seven, report the outer marker inbound.
Cessna three five mike, one zero miles from Netts, turn right heading zero four
zero, intercept the final approach course at or above three thousand. Cleared for
the RNAV runway niner approach. Monitor Cleveland tower on one two zero
point niner. Report Netts inbound.

Radar Separation

/

405

4
Vagey

er
aliz

Loc

United 311

Figure 9–15. A sample turn onto the final approach course of an ILS approach.

9

Netts
intersection

N35M

Figure 9–16. A sample turn onto the final approach course of an RNAV approach.

ASR
Approach

Radar can also be used by controllers as a navigational aid to conduct an
instrument approach. During a radar-guided approach, the controller uses
radar to monitor the aircraft’s position relative to the runway centerline and
provides instructions to the pilot to keep the aircraft on the centerline of the
runway. This procedure, known as an airport surveillance radar (ASR)
approach, can be used by pilots who are experiencing navigation receiver
problems or who may be unable or unwilling to conduct any of the other
instrument approaches at the airport. The minima for ASR approaches are

406 / CHAPTER 9
published by the National Ocean Survey and other agencies and are normally
included in the instrument approach procedures booklet used by pilots (see
Figure 9–17).
During an ASR approach, the controller is responsible for advising the
pilot of the aircraft’s position relative to the runway centerline and then issuing
vectors that keep the aircraft on the extended centerline. The controller is also
required to keep the pilot informed of the aircraft’s distance from the approach
end of the runway and may issue recommended altitudes if requested by the
pilot, although it is up to the pilot to accurately monitor the aircraft’s altitude.
Before starting an ASR approach, the controller must inform the pilot of
the following:
The type of approach that will be conducted (a surveillance radar approach).
The location of the missed approach point (usually 1 mile from the approach
end of the runway).
Lost communications procedures.

For example:
Cherokee niner para alpha, this will be a surveillance approach to runway one
zero, missed approach point one mile from end of runway. If no transmissions
are received for one minute in the pattern or for one five seconds while on final,
proceed VFR. If unable, maintain three thousand until established on the NDB
runway two eight approach.

At least once before beginning the ASR approach, the controller must also
inform the pilot of the aircraft’s position and of when the pilot may expect to
begin the descent to the published minimum descent altitude; the pilot need
not acknowledge any further transmissions. When the aircraft reaches the final
approach fix (usually 5 nautical miles from the approach end of the runway),
the controller advises the pilot to descend to the MDA and issues instructions
that will guide the aircraft to the end of the runway. For example:
Beech five three november is one two miles from the airport on a left
downwind, prepare to descend in seven miles.
Beech five three november is five miles from end of runway, descend to your
minimum descent altitude.

Once the pilot has initiated the descent, the controller monitors the aircraft’s
progress and issues course guidance information, the aircraft’s position relative to the runway centerline, vectors that will return the aircraft to the runway centerline, and the aircraft’s distance from the end of the runway. These
transmissions are usually made at approximately 15-second intervals. If the
pilot requests, the controller can also issue recommended altitudes, based on
a standard descent rate of 300 feet per mile. The procedure for determining
these recommended altitudes is found in FAA Order 7210.3, “Recommended

Radar Separation

Figure 9–17. Civil radar (ASR) instrument approach minimums.

/

407

408 / CHAPTER 9

8
5

1

6

7

9

4

9

3
2

7 n mi

6 n mi

5 n mi

4 n mi
3 n mi
2 n mi
Distance from runway end

1 n mi

Figure 9–18. An aircraft conducting an ASR approach.

Altitudes for Surveillance Approaches.” Here is an example of phraseology for
a complete ASR approach (depicted in Figure 9–18):
1. Mooney six one hotel, five miles from end of runway, fly heading zero niner
zero, descend to your minimum descent altitude.
2. Mooney six one hotel, turn left heading zero seven zero, slightly right of course.
3. Mooney six one hotel, four miles from end of runway, fly heading zero seven
zero, slightly right of course, correcting slowly, recommended altitude one
thousand eight hundred.
4. Mooney six one hotel, on course, turn right heading zero eight zero.
5. Mooney six one hotel, three miles from end of runway, slightly left of course, turn
right heading zero eight five, recommended altitude one thousand five hundred.
6. Mooney six one hotel, fly heading zero eight five, slightly left of course,
correcting slowly.
7. Mooney six one hotel, two miles from end of runway, on course, turn left
heading zero niner zero, recommended altitude one thousand two hundred.
8. Mooney six one hotel, drifting left of course, turn right heading one zero zero.
9. Mooney six one hotel, one mile from end of runway, slightly left of course,
over missed approach point. Proceed visually, the tower has cleared you to
land runway niner. If runway or approach lights not in sight, execute a missed
approach and climb to three thousand feet heading zero niner zero.

Radar Trafﬁc Information
Controllers can also use radar to assist pilots in avoiding potential conflicts
with other aircraft by advising them of the relative position and altitude of
any potentially conflicting traffic. This is known as providing traffic advisories.

Radar Separation

/

409

A controller may provide traffic advisories to any aircraft, whether IFR or VFR,
on a workload-permitting basis. Priority is still given to providing separation to
aircraft that are participating in the ATC system.
The controller should phrase the advisory in the following manner:
The azimuth of the conflicting traffic in terms of a 12-hour clock relative to the
aircraft’s ground track (see Figure 9–19).
The aircraft distance in nautical miles.
The direction in which the conflicting traffic is proceeding.
The altitude and type of aircraft, if known.

The following advisories would be used for the situations depicted in
Figure 9–20:
Eastern two eleven, traffic twelve o’clock, three miles, eastbound, type and
altitude unknown.

12
o’clock
1

11

10

2

9

3

8

4

5

7
6
o’clock

Figure 9–19. The use of the clock in issuing traffic advisories to an aircraft.

410 / CHAPTER 9

Unidentified traffic

Lear

12 o’clock
1 o’clock

Military trainer

9 o’clock
Eastern 211

Figure 9–20. Sample traffic advisories.

Eastern two eleven, traffic is a Lear at one o’clock, two miles, westbound at one
two thousand.
Eastern two eleven, traffic nine o’clock, five miles, southbound, a VFR military
trainer, last reported altitude six thousand.

The controller should not issue the altitude of the conflicting traffic unless it is
equipped with a mode C transponder and the controller has verified its accuracy. If the aircraft’s altitude has not been verified, the pilot should be informed
that the altitude indicated on the radar screen may not be accurate. Once the
conflicting traffic no longer poses a threat to the aircraft, the pilot should be so
informed (“Eastern two eleven, traffic no longer a factor”).
It is mandatory that the controller provide traffic advisories to certain types
of aircraft if it appears that the two targets will merge. This is known as mergingtarget procedures. These procedures must be applied to the following aircraft:
Any aircraft operating at or above 10,000 feet MSL.
Turbojet aircraft regardless of altitude.
Presidential aircraft regardless of altitude.

Radar Separation

/

411

Merging-target advisories can be discontinued if the controller is certain that
both aircraft are separated by more than the vertical separation minima.
Both merging-target advisories and traffic advisories should be provided early enough so that the pilot has ample time to locate the other
aircraft or to ask the controller for a traffic avoidance vector. If the pilot
requests such a vector, the controller should issue a heading that will prevent
the targets from merging. If the controller is unable to do so, because of other
conflicting traffic or procedural restrictions, the pilot should be informed of
the reason.
Many of the computerized beacon processing systems used by the FAA
are capable of projecting the flight paths of aircraft and can alert the controller in advance of certain potentially unsafe conditions. Once an alert has been
sounded by the radar system, it is the controller’s responsibility to resolve the
situation or to advise the pilot to resolve the situation.
One of the most important of these safety systems is the Conflict Alert
software program. Conflict Alert uses the tracking program already operational
on these systems to predict when two tracked aircraft will approach each other
within the vertical, lateral, or longitudinal separation minima. If Conflict Alert
predicts that this condition might occur, the computer system alerts the controller, who can then evaluate the situation and initiate immediate corrective
action if needed.
In certain terminal areas, however, Conflict Alert constantly predicts hazardous situations that do not exist. Since the computer software is unaware of
the controller’s or the pilot’s planned actions, it can only predict an aircraft’s
future ground track based on its past history. This may cause false alerts to be
routinely sounded at a busy approach control facility where the airspace configuration is necessarily complex.
For example, at a busy airport where two aircraft are being vectored for
parallel runways, there is usually a point when both aircraft are in a position
where, if they are not turned, they are likely to conflict (see Figure 9–21). This
situation is perfectly acceptable since the controller is planning to turn each
aircraft toward the appropriate runway. But because Conflict Alert has no
way of knowing this, it sounds a warning each time two aircraft are in this
position.
This routine sounding of an alert is distracting and potentially dangerous,
because every time the alert is sounded, the controller must verify whether an
actual problem exists, diverting attention away from other traffic. In addition,
the routine sounding of a misleading alert will eventually cause controllers
to disregard any alarm produced by the Conflict Alert system. For these reasons, FAA computer programmers inhibit Conflict Alert in areas where numerous false alarms are commonly generated. Inhibiting the Conflict Alert is not
a decision made lightly. It is reached only after extensive coordination with
the controllers, management, and computer system programmers. Additional
information about Conflict Alert can be obtained from FAA Advisory Circulars
90–77 and 90–78.

412 / CHAPTER 9

22

00

ft.

LOM
LOM

LMM

On
LMM

co

ur

se

14L

14R

Figure 9–21. A situation in which two aircraft are heading toward parallel ILS
approaches. In all likelihood, Conflict Alert will need to be inhibited in this area.

Use of Automation Tools
User Request
Evaluation
Tool

User request evaluation tool (URET) uses flight plan data, forecast winds, aircraft
performance characteristics, and track data to derive expected aircraft trajectories. URET then predicts conflicts between aircraft and between aircraft and
special use or designated airspace. It can provide the controller with a tool to test
potential amendments to an aircraft’s route and/or altitude prior to issuance by
the controller. It also provides enhanced flight data management capabilities.
URET operates in the background, detecting and displaying potential aircraft conflicts. En route controllers must actively scan the URET information
to determine if any alerts have been generated and, if so, to evaluate the alert
and take appropriate action as early as practical (see Figure 9–22).
The controller should also use URET when deciding whether to amend an
aircraft’s route of flight and/or altitude. If time and workload permit, controllers should use the trial plan capability to evaluate any solutions to predicted
conflicts or the feasibility of granting user requests before issuing the amended
clearance. To assist air traffic controllers in detecting aircraft that are within

Radar Separation

/

413

Wide Area Augmentation System
Communication
Satellite

GPS Satellites
L1

L1

Ground Ear th
Station

Wide Area
Master Station

Wide Area
Reference Station

Figure 9–22. Wide area augmentation system. Federal Aviation Administration.

or approaching an altitude that may be in close proximity to the ground or to
obstructions, the FAA has implemented a computer software program known
as minimum safe altitude warning (MSAW). This program uses the mode C
altitude encoder on the aircraft and the radar computer system tracking capabilities to predict whenever a tracked aircraft is within imminent danger of
colliding with the ground.
To provide this service, FAA programmers have divided every ARTCC
and radar approach control airspace into 2-mile squares known as bins. The
highest obstacle within each bin is entered into a database that is instantaneously and continuously accessed by the radar processing system. During routine operation, the radar processing computer constantly compares the mode
C–supplied altitude for every tracked aircraft against the information in the
database. If the aircraft is less than 500 feet above the highest obstacle in the
bin, the controller is alerted.
The MSAW software also predicts the aircraft’s flight path for the next
30-second interval and calculates whether the aircraft will enter a bin below

414 / CHAPTER 9
the minimum safe altitude if it continues on its present heading, altitude, or rate
of climb or descent (see Figure 9–23). If the aircraft is predicted to enter a bin
at an altitude lower than 300 feet above the highest obstacle, the controller is
also alerted.
Because aircraft conducting instrument approaches must necessarily
descend closer to the ground than the MSAW system permits, allowances must
be made in these areas. The MSAW software relaxes the obstacle avoidance
criteria but still monitors aircraft between the final approach fix and a point
2 nautical miles from the approach end of the runway. The MSAW software
is designed to predict both unreasonably low altitudes and excessive aircraft
descent rates that might prove to be dangerous. Every aircraft within the
approach area is monitored by the radar system, and an alert is sounded if
an aircraft descends 100 feet below the minimum altitude for that segment of
the approach. In addition, the radar processing computer uses past altitude
information to extrapolate the aircraft’s current rate of descent. If it determines
that the aircraft is currently above the minimum altitude for that segment but

Figure 9–23. Minimum safe altitude warning operation (FAA).

Radar Separation

/

415

Figure 9–24. Low-altitude alert as shown on the controller’s radar display (FAA).

is predicted to descend 200 feet below the minimum altitude within the next
15 seconds, the controller is alerted. Because of differing aircraft types and
approach minima for each runway, the MSAW software is inhibited within
2 nautical miles of the approach end of the runway.
Whenever an unsafe condition is predicted by the MSAW software, an
alert is sounded and the letters “Low Alt” begin to flash in the aircraft’s data
block (see Figure 9–24). When this occurs, the controller must immediately
evaluate the situation and, if appropriate, issue the pilot a verbal warning
(“Cessna two papa alpha, low-altitude alert, check your altitude immediately,
altimeter two niner eight six”). It is then up to the pilot to evaluate the situation
and determine what actions are necessary to return the aircraft to the proper
flight path.

416 / CHAPTER 9

KEY TERMS
airport surveillance radar (ASR)
approach
approach gate
bins
Conflict Alert
coordination
domestic reduced vertical
separation minima (DRVSM)
handoff

merging-target procedures
minimum safe altitude warning
(MSAW)
minimum vectoring altitudes
point out
point out approved
radar contact
reduced vertical separation
minima (RVSM)

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. How are aircraft identified using radar?
2. How are aircraft separated using radar?
3. How is the transponder used in air traffic control?
4. How are handoffs accomplished?
5. How can radar be used as an instrument approach?

special identification pulse (SIP)
traffic
traffic advisories
traffic observed
transfer of communication
transfer of control
vectors

10
Operation in the National Airspace
System
Checkpoints
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Describe the ﬂow of ﬂight plan information through the air trafﬁc control system.
2. Describe the operation of the ﬂight data processing system.
3. Describe the functions of the Air Trafﬁc Control System Command Center and
trafﬁc management units.
4. Explain the sectorization procedures used at a typical medium- and high-activity
radar facility.
5. Understand the procedure used to assist lost or overdue aircraft.
6. Explain the uses of en route ﬂight advisory service.

418 / CHAPTER 10
A detailed description of flight through the air traffic control system is too complex to be completed in an entire textbook, much less a single chapter. Thus,
this chapter attempts to summarize the process by presenting examples of how
simple IFR and VFR flights are conducted in the air traffic control system, using
two simulated flights. The first is a simulated IFR airline flight from Phoenix,
Arizona, to Indianapolis, Indiana. The second example simulates a VFR flight
from Lafayette, Indiana, to Champaign, Illinois. After following these simulated
flights, you should have a good idea of how the ATC system actually works.

Overview of an IFR Flight
Flight
Planning
and IFR
Clearances

Pilots of personal and corporate aircraft usually contact a flight service station (FSS) to file a flight plan and receive weather briefings. An increasing
number of pilots, however, are using private weather-briefing firms and are
able to file flight plans directly through these organizations. Airlines usually
file flight plans for their pilots and military pilots through their military operations office.
Prior to beginning a flight, the pilot receives a thorough weather briefing that includes both current and forecast weather conditions along the route
of flight. These conditions include known or suspected ATC delays, navigation equipment outages, and any notices to airmen (NOTAMs). NOTAMs are
entered into the FAA computer system by local flight service stations or at the
Flight Data Center (FDC) in Washington, D.C. NOTAMs issued by local flight
service stations include local conditions such as airport or runway closures and
unlit obstructions. NOTAMs issued by the Flight Data Center, known as FDC
NOTAMs, concern en route navaid outages, changes to published instrument
approach procedures, or any emergencies (see Figure 10–1).
Once the weather briefing is completed, and the flight plan information
has been entered into the computer, the information is digitally transmitted to
Atlanta ARTCC (ZTL) where it is checked for accuracy and for proper routing. ZTL ARTCC is the primary flight data processing center. Salt Lake City
ARTCC (ZLC) is the backup flight data processing facility.
Beginning in 2008, the FAA implemented changes in all computer systems that
permit the automatic assignment of RNAV routes, based on installed aircraft equipment and capabilities. Pilots filing flight plans that use RNAV departures and arrivals
must now use the ICAO flight plan format when filing flight plans.

Coded
Departure
Routes

The FAA publishes about 15,000 different routes in a standard format that
is identified using a unique code for each route. These routes are known as
coded departure routes (CDR). Pilots familiar with CDR requirements and
with access to the database can place the phrase “CDR-capable” in their flight
plan, advising the FAA that the aircraft has the required navigation equipment
and enough fuel to fly the CDRs. An example of CDRs from Phoenix to Indianapolis are included in Figure 10–2.

Operation in the National Airspace System

/

419

Dallas-Love Field
FDC 7/1246 /DAL/FI/T DALLAS-LOVE FIELD, DALLAS, TX.
RADAR-1 AMDT 24, S-13L MDA 1000 HAT 515 ALL CATS. VIS
CAT C 5000, CAT D 6000. S-13R MDA 1000 HAT 524 ALL
CATS. VIS CAT C 1 1/2, CAT D 1 3/4
FDC 7/1066 /DAL/FI/T DALLAS-LOVE FIELD, DALLAS, TX. ILS
RWY 31R ORIG. CIRCLING VIS CAT B 1 1/4, CAT C 2 1/2, CAT
D 2 3/4
FDC 7/1035 /DAL/FI/T DALLAS-LOVE FIELD, DALLAS, TX. ILS
RWY 31L AMDT 15. S-I DME MINIMA MDA 1360 HAT 885 ALL
CATS. VIS CATS A/B RVR 4000, CAT 2 1/4, CAT D 2 1/2.
CIRCLING MDA 1400 HAA 913 ALL CATS. VIS CATS A/B 1 1/4,
CAT C 2 3/4, CAT D 3. DME MINIMA: S-LOC 31R MDA 1340
HAA 853 ALL CATS. VIS CAT A 1/2, CAT B 3/4, CAT C 2, CAT
D 2 1/4
FDC 7/811 /DAL/FI/T DALLAS-LOVE FIELD, DALLAS, TX. IFR
TAKEOFF MINIMUMS RWYS 31L/R AND RWY 36 STANDARD.
RWYS 13L/R AND RWY 18 1000-2 OR STANDARD WITH A MIN
CLIMB OF 290 FT PER NM TO 1500.
FDC 6/1813 /DAL/FI/T DALLAS-LOVE FIELD, DALLAS, TX. ILS
31L AMDT 15, S-ILS 31L NA. S-LOC 31L. MDA 1600, HAT 1125
ALL CATS, CIRCLING 1600 HAA 1113 ALL CATS. ENTRA DME
FIX RELOCATED LUE 4.1 DME. REASON: 889 AGL. 1339 AMSL
CRANE 3.9 NM SE OF AIRPORT

Figure 10–1. A sample FDC NOTAM.

CDR Code

Route of Flight (1,298 nm if directly flown)

CDR Miles

Percent
Extra

PHXINDCM

J65 CME TXO J74 IRW J78 FAM ENL BIB KELLY

1,361 nm

5%

PHXINDLW

SILOW1 RSK ALS J102 SLN J24 MCI J80

1,322 nm

2%

PHXINDMA

MAXXO1 CNX J74 IRW J78 FAM ENL BIB KELLY

1,338 nm

3%

PHXINDSJ

SJN3 ABQ J18 SLN J24 MCI J80

1,306 nm

1%

Figure 10–2. Partial list of coded departure routes from Phoenix to Indianapolis.

The FAA also maintains an internal list of certain preferred routes between
city pairs and within certain blocks of airspace. These are the routes that controllers must issue to aircraft, regardless of the pilots’ filed route of flight. These
can dynamically change based upon seasonal, daily, or even hourly projected
traffic flows. Most airlines are familiar enough with standard routings that they
routinely file the FAA preferred routes. If the pilots do not, the flight data computer at Atlanta ARTCC will amend the flight plan, substituting the preferred
route of flight in place of that filed by the pilot.
In the example flight that will be used in this chapter, the pilot might have
filed a route from the Phoenix airport, direct to the Albuquerque VORTAC,
direct to the Wichita VORTAC, direct to the St. Louis VORTAC, then direct to
the Indianapolis airport. This would be indicated on the flight strip as
PHX..ICT..STL..IND

420 / CHAPTER 10
But the flight data processing computer at Atlanta center would substitute a
preferred route, if one existed. For example, the new clearance might become
PHX.SJN3.ABQ.J18.FTI.J19.STL..BIB.RACYR1.IND
This would be translated as Phoenix airport to the Albuquerque VORTAC via
the San Juan 3 departure, then J18 to the Fort Union VORTAC, J19 to the St.
Louis VORTAC, direct to the Bible Grove VORTAC, then via the Racyr One
standard terminal arrival route to the Indianapolis airport.
Traffic Flow
Management
Programs

The Air Traffic Control System Command Center (ATCSCC) located outside
of Washington would also receive the flight plan information. The ATCSCC is
responsible for ensuring that the arrival airport will be able to handle flights
when they are scheduled to arrive. Problems that could occur at the arrival
airport might include capacity restrictions due to overscheduling, low visibility,
runway closures, or convective weather. Every major airport in the United
States has determined the number of aircraft that can be safely landed in any
given hour based upon weather conditions and runway configurations. This is
known as the airport acceptance rate (AAR) and is published by the FAA.
The Indianapolis International Airport has two independent, parallel
runways and can typically handle between twelve and fifty-two aircraft per
hour (see Figure 10–3). These limits have been established by experts familiar
with the airport layout and traffic flows. For example, the lowest limit of
twelve arrivals per hour at Indianapolis occurs if only a single runway is available during low IFR weather conditions. If two runways are available and the
weather is VFR, Indianapolis can handle up to fifty-two arrivals per hour.
If the ATCSCC determines that too many aircraft are scheduled to arrive
at an airport during any given time period, a ground delay will be issued to
some aircraft. Ground delays transfer any expected flight delay to the aircraft

Figure 10–3. Indianapolis airport runway capacities.

Operation in the National Airspace System

/

421

while still on the ground prior to departure. Ground delays are a safer and
more fuel-efficient way for aircraft to absorb known delays.
For example, if an airport could only accept sixty aircraft in any given
hour (hour #1), but eighty were scheduled to arrive during that hour, twenty
aircraft would have to be delayed. The last twenty aircraft scheduled to arrive
during hour #1 that weren’t yet airborne would be issued sufficient departure
delay to ensure that they would arrive at the beginning of hour #2. If more than
sixty total aircraft were now scheduled to arrive during hour #2, a sufficient
number of them would be issued a departure delay to ensure that they arrived
in hour #3. This process of delay would continue until all the flights arrive.
The FAA, airlines, pilots, and others can easily determine if an airport is
predicted to have any overloads during any given time period. Using FAA collaborative decision products, a user can look at the airport demand graphic for
any arrival airport to determine if an excessive number of flights are scheduled
to arrive during any given 60-, 30-, or 15-minute time period and whether a
delay is likely (see Figure 10–4).

Figure 10–4. Newark Airport demand chart.

422 / CHAPTER 10
Another tool that can be used by operators is the FAA’s advisory database
system. Every 3 hours the FAA confers with major system users, makes collaborative decisions, and then disseminates that information to users via a plan
of operations. The plan advises operators of possible delays and other system
problems (see Figure 10–5). Operators can than adjust their schedules ahead
of time if needed.
Sometimes simple solutions can be applied that solve the delay problem.
For example, if there are numerous delays into a major airport, an airline might

Figure 10–5. Plan of operations.

Operation in the National Airspace System

/

423

choose to combine two partially full flights into one full flight, thereby reducing
expenses and the number of aircraft attempting to fly into a congested airport.
Other operators may choose to use alternate airports or simply cancel flights. In
any case, the FAA makes the plan known well in advance for system users.
After any airline or other operator adjustments are made, if the demand
for an airport is still predicted to exceed its capacity, the ATCSCC will issue an
advisory and start calculating and disseminating individual aircraft ground delays.
Once an aircraft’s ground delay is calculated, it is added to the pilot’s proposed
departure time and is called an expect departure clearance time (EDCT). For
example, if a pilot filed a flight plan to depart the Phoenix airport at 1445Z, with
a planned arrival in Indianapolis at 1800Z, but the ATCSCC calculated that the
aircraft’s arrival needed to be delayed till 1850Z, a 50 minute delay would be
added to the proposed departure time, giving an EDCT from Phoenix of 1535Z.
If an EDCT is issued, it is printed directly on the flight progress strip
at the PHX tower for issuance to the pilot. Another method of obtaining the
EDCT is for a controller at the tower to call the ATCSCC directly. At most busy
airports, if there are expected system delays, a traffic management controller
will be assigned this duty (see Figure 10–6).

Figure 10–6. Ground delay advisory for Newark Airport.

424 / CHAPTER 10
Alternative
Routes

The ATCSCC also checks to make sure that there are no flow constrained areas
(FCA) along the route of flight. An FCA is a block of airspace that has some
actual or forecast temporary flight restriction that might reduce its capacity.
Severe weather avoidance plans (SWAP) or alternate playbook routes might be
issued if, in the opinion of the ATCSCC, overall efficiency will be improved by
rerouting the aircraft.
SWAP may be invoked when a large-area, long-duration weather event
threatens to disrupt a large section of airspace. Typical scenarios include large
convective systems that routinely occur over the middle and southern portions
of the United States during the spring and summer. If the ATCSCC deems it
necessary, various SWAP options can be selected that route aircraft around the
projected areas that will be impacted by the weather. These alternative routes
will be issued prior to departure so that aircraft operators and planners can
adjust their operations as necessary.
Playbook routes are a set of published alternative routes to an airport or
through potentially heavily congested airspace that are invoked when traffic
flow is predicted to be affected (see Figure 10–7). Playbook routes are used
when both the receiving facility (usually a TRACON) and the ATCSCC determine that for a period of time, traffic along a busy route will be affected by
weather. Playbook routes typically offer alternatives for the pilots that either
trail behind the weather as it clears the area or provide an alternative path in
front of the weather.
The difficulty with invoking SWAP or issuing playbook routes is that
most of the route changes affect the entire route of the aircraft, from departure
airport to destination. The idea is that it is easier to plan and it might actually
shorten the overall extension to the flight if a route adjustment can be made
early in the flight. This keeps the system from having to divert large numbers of
aircraft in a chaotic manner at the edge of a flow constrained area.
The difficulty is in predicting the overall movement of the weather area
and determining whether it will even occur. To properly issue alternative routes,
someone must decide hours before the weather event when it will happen, the
extent of its effect on the airspace, how far it will move, and how fast. All of
these predictions are currently impossible to forecast with tremendous accuracy, so there are times when the ATCSCC invokes actions for weather that
never occurs or sometimes does not invoke alternative plans when weather is
stronger than anticipated. This ability to predict and adjust traffic flows is still
more of an art than a science.

Clearance
Delivery

One of the duties of the clearance delivery controller (see Figure 10–8) is usually to create and keep the ATIS recording updated. For the purpose of this
flight, we will assume that “information kilo” is the current ATIS at PhoenixSky Harbor Airport. At many larger airports, digital or d-ATIS is available to
pilots and other operators. Digital ATIS is a digitally transmitted version of the
ATIS audio broadcast and can be accessed on the flight deck and in flight
operations in real time. An example of an ATIS recording at Phoenix follows.

Operation in the National Airspace System

/

425

Figure 10–7. Playbook route into Chicago O’Hare International Airport.

Phoenix-Sky Harbor Airport information kilo, two two one five zulu weather.
Wind two five zero at one four, gust two zero, visibility one zero. Few clouds at
one one thousand, two five thousand scattered. Temperature two five, dew point
minus three, altimeter two niner eight one. Runways seven right, seven left and
eight in use. Simultaneous approaches in use. Expect visual approach runway
eight or runway seven right. I-L-S runways eight and seven right approaches
in use. Departing runway seven left. Low level wind shear advisories are in
effect. All pilots should read back hold short instructions. All aircraft taxi with
transponder on. Advise you have information kilo.

426 / CHAPTER 10
Phoenix Air Traffic Control Tower
Operating Positions, Duties, and Responsibilities (excerpted)

PURPOSE: This document specifies standard operating procedure at the Phoenix Sky Harbor Air Traffic
Control Tower and TRACON
CANCELLATION: Phoenix Tower SOP dated August 3, 1981.
SCOPE: The procedures herein are for the purpose of conducting operations at the Phoenix Air Traffic
Control Tower and TRACON within the airspace delegated to each position.
PROCEDURES:
General
Deviations from procedures contained in this letter of agreement are authorized on an individual aircraft
basis after coordination between involved controllers.
Aircraft Group Definitions
• Group A: Turbojets
• Group B: Turboprops
• Group C: All other aircraft and helicopters
Traffic Flow Definitions
• East Flow: Runways 7R/7L/8 in use.
• West Flow: Runways 25L/25R/26 in use.
• Runways 7L/25R is the primary departure runway
• Runways 7R/8 and 25L/26 are primarily arrival runways
Air Traffic Control Tower Operating Positions
• Clearance Delivery - 118.10
• Ground South - 132.55
• Ground North - 119.75
• Local South - 120.90
• Local North - 118.70
CLEARANCE DELIVERY
• Records ATIS
• Reviews flight strips for accuracy and makes valid, timely amendments as necessary.
• Issues IFR clearances.
• Coordinates EDCTs with ATCSCC and the TMUs at P50 and ZAB
• Assign all aircraft the following initial altitude restriction. Advise that they can expect their filed altitude
10 minutes after departure.
• IFR Group A aircraft – 7,000⬘ MSL
• IFR Group B/C aircraft – 4,000⬘ MSL
• VFR aircraft – at or below 4,000⬘ MSL.
• North departures will be issued a departure control frequency of 119.2
• South departures will be issued a departure control frequency of 126.8
GROUND CONTROL
Aircraft shall be assigned a departure runway as follows unless another runway is specifically requested
by the pilot and coordination with the Local Control position(s) is accomplished. Opposite direction
operations are prohibited.
Figure 10–8. Phoenix Tower standard operating procedures.

Operation in the National Airspace System

/

427

• Aircraft north of Runway 8/26, assign Runway 8 or 26 for the flow in use.
• Aircraft south of Runway 7R/25L, assign Runway 7R or 25L for the flow in use.
• All group A aircraft should, to the extent possible, be assigned runway 7L/25R with departures
sequenced by alternating northbound and southbound aircraft if practicable. Group B and C aircraft
should be assigned runway 8/26 if northbound and runway 7L/25R if southbound.
During East Flow Operations
• Ground North is responsible for the North complex and taxiway “S” south to taxiway “D”.
• Ground South is responsible for the South complex and taxiways “R” and “T” north to taxiway “C”.
During West Flow Operations
• Ground North is responsible for the North complex and taxiway “S” and “R” south to taxiway “D”.
• Ground South is responsible for the South complex and taxiway “T” north to taxiway “C”.
LOCAL CONTROL
• Taxi Into Position and Hold (TIPH) operations are authorized in accordance with FAA Order 7110.65,
provided:
• Taxi into position and hold operations shall not be used when an arriving aircraft is within 3 NM of the
arrival runway.
• Taxi into position and hold operations will be suspended during times of poor radio communications,
frequency congestion, or pilot inexperience, resuming TIPH when appropriate.
• Local Control shall provide separation services to all aircraft within tower airspace as defined as the
ground up to and including 3,000⬘ MSL.
• Local South is responsible for aircraft using runways 7R/7L/25R/25L and Taxiway F.
• Local North is responsible for aircraft using runway 8/26.
• The transfer of communications to departure control shall normally be accomplished within one mile of
the departure end of the runway.
• Local Control shall notify the appropriate departure controller via automated message systems when
departures begin their takeoff roll.
• Local control shall issue the following departure headings:
• Group A aircraft – runway heading
• Group B/C aircraft
• Northbound during West Flow operations – 290 degrees.
• Northbound during East Flow operations – 040 degrees.
• Southbound during West Flow operations – 230 degrees.
• Southbound during East Flow operations – 110 degrees.
• VFR aircraft
• Northbound during West Flow operations – 330 degrees.
• Northbound during East Flow operations – 010 degrees.
• Southbound during West Flow operations – 190 degrees.
• Southbound during East Flow operations – 140 degrees.
Figure 10–8. (continued)

428 / CHAPTER 10
Thirty minutes prior to the aircraft’s proposed departure time, the FDP
computer at Atlanta center causes a flight strip to be printed at the departure
airport. If the departure airport is not served by an ATC facility, or if the facility
is not properly equipped, the strip will be printed at the nearest facility. At this
time, the FDP computer also assigns the aircraft a transponder code. Since the
number of codes available is limited, this procedure is used to effectively ration
transponder codes. Assuming that the aircraft is departing from a properly
equipped airport, the flight strip will be printed at the clearance delivery position in the control tower. The clearance delivery controller is responsible for
ensuring that the aircraft’s altitude and route of flight conform to the appropriate procedures. The controller can then issue the clearance to the pilot.
In most cases, procedures specify that the aircraft be initially restricted
to an altitude lower than that filed by the pilot. If the controlling facility has
responsibility for the airspace extending up to 10,000 feet, for example, the
clearance delivery controller must initially restrict the aircraft to this altitude,
so that in case of temporary radio failure the aircraft does not leave the vertical
confines of the facility’s airspace before a handoff has been accomplished. At
some facilities, additional constraints have been imposed on departing aircraft.
It is not unusual to restrict an aircraft to an initial altitude of 3,000 to 6,000
feet. The advantages of this procedure will be explained shortly.
The clearance delivery controller must issue the pilot the clearance using
one of two methods. If no changes were made to the pilot’s requested route of
flight, the controller can clear the pilot “as filed.” This means the route that the
pilot filed originally is the same route as that contained in the clearance. An
“as filed” clearance does not include the pilot’s requested altitude. That altitude
must always be stated by the controller when issuing a clearance to the pilot.
The phraseology for an “as filed” clearance is
Cessna two five two mike november, cleared to Indianapolis International
Airport as filed, climb and maintain one zero thousand, squawk three seven
four one.

If the control tower is equipped with a departure control position, the
clearance must also include the departure controller’s frequency. In addition, if
facility procedures specify that every departing aircraft should be temporarily
restricted to a lower altitude, this restriction must be included as part of the
original clearance. If a lower altitude is temporarily assigned, the pilot must be
advised as to when the altitude filed in the flight plan might be expected:
Cessna two five two mike november, cleared to Indianapolis International
Airport as filed, climb and maintain five thousand, expect one two thousand
one zero minutes after departure, departure control frequency one two three
point seven five, squawk three seven four one.

If the aircraft is departing from an airport not served by a facility equipped
with radar, the clearance must also include the first airway segment that the

Operation in the National Airspace System

/

429

pilot has filed. This serves as a double check to ensure that the issued clearance
is the same as that originally filed by the pilot:
Cessna two five two mike november, cleared to Indianapolis International
Airport as filed via victor ninety-seven, climb and maintain five thousand,
expect one two thousand one zero minutes after departure, departure control
frequency one two three point seven five, squawk three seven four one.

If a very small change has been made to the pilot’s route of flight (such as
the imposition of a preferred route), the phrase “rest of route unchanged” may
still be used, but the changed portion of the route must be stated:
Cessna two five two mike november, cleared to the Indianapolis International
Airport via victor ninety-two south, Jetts intersection, rest of route unchanged,
climb and maintain five thousand, expect one two thousand one zero minutes
after departure, departure control frequency one two three point seven five,
squawk three seven four one.

But if the route has been changed substantially, or if the abbreviation
FRC, which stands for full route clearance, is printed on the strip (signifying
that the flight service specialist amended the clearance), the entire route of
flight must be stated:
Cessna two five two mike november, cleared to Indianapolis International
Airport via victor three ninety-nine, climb and maintain five thousand, expect
one two thousand one zero minutes after departure, departure control frequency
one two three point seven five, squawk three seven four one.

At terminal facilities not equipped with radar, after the pilot has verified
the clearance, the clearance delivery controller enters the estimated departure
time of the aircraft into the computer system and passes the strip to the ground
controller. At facilities equipped with radar, the radar system will automatically send a departure message to the ARTCC upon receipt of the aircraft’s
transponder signal.
Phoenix
Airspace

Within the Phoenix approach control (P50) airspace, in general, departing aircraft are typically climbed to an altitude of 7,000⬘ feet MSL while departing on
runway heading. All arrivals are descended to an altitude no lower than 8,000
feet until past the airport while on either a left or right downwind. Once past
the airport, they are typically issued a descent to the minimum vectoring altitude (see Figure 10–9).
When pilots at Phoenix contact clearance delivery for their clearance, they
will initially be restricted to an altitude of 7,000 feet or less to ensure positive
vertical separation between departures and arrivals. They must also be issued a
time they can expect a higher altitude and a departure control frequency. The
clearance then issued by clearance delivery would be

430 / CHAPTER 10

Figure 10–9. Phoenix TRACON minimum Vectoring Altitude chart.

Southwest eighteen ninety-four, cleared to the Indianapolis airport via the San
Juan 3 departure Albuquerque transition, J18 Fort Union, J19 St. Louis, direct
Bible Grove, Racyr One arrival. Climb and maintain seven thousand, expect
flight level three five zero, one zero minutes after departure, departure control
one one niner point two, squawk five three six two.

Operation in the National Airspace System

/

431

If the route of flight on the flight progress strip was exactly what the pilot
had originally filed, the route section of the clearance could have been replaced
with the phrase “cleared as filed,” although the rest of the information would
still be read. If the aircraft has automation capabilities, the clearance could be
transmitted electronically and printed in the cockpit eliminating the need for
the clearance to be read over the air in its entirety.
If an EDCT time has been issued, the pilot would be advised by the clearance delivery controller when they could expect to taxi ensuring that they actually take off at or near the EDCT time. When it is time to taxi, the aircraft
would be advised to contact ground control, who would issue taxi clearance to
the appropriate runway, which according to the ATIS is runway 7L.
Ground Control The ground controller is responsible for issuing a taxi clearance that will take the
Coded
aircraft to the departure end of the appropriate runway (see Figure 10–10).
Departure
The ground controller is also responsible for any vehicles that must travel on the
Routes
airport movement area. Taxi instructions are usually issued using a combination
of some of the following clearances:
Taxi runway seven left.
Taxi runway eight via taxiway bravo.
Taxi runway seven right, follow the seven twenty-seven off your left.
Taxi runway eight, pass behind the aircraft ahead and to your right on taxiway
bravo.
Runway seven right taxi via echo and echo three, hold short of runway seven
left, traffic landing.

If the aircraft must cross an active runway before reaching the departure
runway, the ground controller must coordinate this crossing with the local
controller. This is accomplished by asking the local controller for permission to
cross the active runway at a certain location. The local controller may approve
the request, deny it, or approve it subject to some restrictions:
GROUND CONTROL: Cross runway seven left at echo ten?
LOCAL CONTROL: Cross runway seven left at echo ten approved.

After the aircraft has crossed the runway, the ground controller must
advise the local controller that the operation has been completed.
At Phoenix, there are typically two ground controllers. One handles the
taxiways on the north side of the airport and operates using frequency 119.75.
The other handles the south side of the airport on 132.55.
Assuming, in the example, that it is now time to let the aircraft depart, the
flight crew would contact ground control. If the aircraft is parked at Terminal
4 and will be using runway 7L for departure, the flight crew must first contact
north ground control on 119.75. After the crew confirms the aircraft’s identification and location, the ground controller would advise them to begin their taxi.

SW-4, 09 APR 2009 to 07 MAY 2009

Figure 10–10. Phoenix Airport chart.

SW-4, 09 APR 2009 to 07 MAY 2009

432 / CHAPTER 10

Operation in the National Airspace System

/

433

Southwest eighteen ninety-four, taxi to runway seven left via taxiways charlie,
sierra and echo. Contact south ground on one three two point five five when
established on taxiway sierra.

Upon crossing the bridge taxiway “sierra,” the south ground controller
would monitor the aircraft’s progress all the way to the approach end of runway 7L, making adjustments or issuing additional instructions keeping ground
traffic separated. Upon reaching the end of the approach end of runway 7L, the
pilots would contact local control on 120.9 and advise ready for takeoff.
Phoenix Tower, Southwest eighteen ninety-four, runway seven left ready for takeoff.

Local Control

It is the local controller’s responsibility to safely sequence departing aircraft
into the local traffic flow while still complying with any departure instructions issued by the departure controller. The local controller is not permitted
to depart an IFR aircraft without the approval of the departure controller. This
approval may be received specifically for each aircraft, or routine departure
instructions may be specified by facility procedures.
Most radar-equipped facilities have devised a system that permits the local
controller to depart an IFR aircraft without prior verbal coordination with the
departure controller. This method of operation requires that a specific block of
airspace be reserved for departing aircraft, and the local controller is authorized
to depart aircraft into this area without prior coordination. The local controller
still retains responsibility for the initial separation of IFR departures, however.
When using this type of system, the approach controllers are responsible for
keeping inbound aircraft separated from this departure area.
The departure area is usually the shape of a wide fan or a narrow corridor
(see Figure 10–11). This wedge of airspace usually extends from the ground up

120∞

Departure area
30∞

30∞

3,000–7,000 ft.

3–5 n mi

Runway

Figure 10–11. The departure fan used by the local controller to initially separate
departures from arrivals.

434 / CHAPTER 10
to an altitude of 3,000 to 6,000 feet above the ground. As long as the clearance
delivery controller has restricted the aircraft to the appropriate altitude and the
local controller assigns a heading that will keep the aircraft within the confines
of the departure area, no prior coordination between the local and departure
controllers is needed.
At Phoenix, when arriving and departing to the east, arrivals are sequenced
for runways 7R and 8. Departures use runway 7L. Assuming that visual conditions exist, aircraft can depart runway 7L independently of arrivals on the
other two runways. So long as the controller ensures both wake turbulence
separation as well as runway separation (6,000⬘) between successive departures, SWA1894 can be cleared to depart.
Southwest eighteen ninety-four, fly runway heading, runway seven left, cleared
for takeoff.

At the same time as takeoff clearance was being issued, the local controller would scan the bar code printed on the flight strip, indicating that the
aircraft has departed. This would activate the flight data processing system and
electronically “send” the flight strip to the appropriate departure controller.
This action would also begin the process of sending the flight data downstream
to every controller along the aircrafts route of flight (see Figure 10–12).
Once the aircraft has departed and the controller has resolved any conflicts with local traffic, the pilot is directed to contact the departure controller.
Since the appropriate frequency was previously issued by the clearance delivery
controller, the local controller is not required to restate it.

Figure 10–12. Bar code reader in control tower.

Operation in the National Airspace System

/

435

Southwest eighteen ninety-four, contact departure.

Departure
Control

Depending on the complexity of the facility, departure control may be operated
by the approach controller, separate control position, or could even be divided
into a number of different subsectors. In any case, it is the responsibility of the
departure controller to separate departing aircraft from all others while still
complying with appropriate facility procedures. Once the aircraft has been
changed to the departure controller’s frequency, this controller must radaridentify the aircraft and verify the accuracy of the aircraft’s mode C transponder, if the aircraft has one. It is the departure controller’s job to radar-identify
the aircraft to ensure that the controller has a positive identification of the
radar target. The easiest method used to radar-identify an aircraft is to observe
a departing aircraft target within 1 mile of the takeoff runway end. The aircraft’s mode C altimeter function must also be verified. This is typically accomplished by the pilot stating his or her altitude on initial contact.
Phoenix departure, Southwest eighteen ninety-four, one thousand five hundred
climbing seven thousand.

Assuming the controller has radar-identified the aircraft, the pilot will be
so advised. If traffic permits an unrestricted climb, the pilot may be assigned a
higher altitude (generally the top of the TRACON airspace or a lower altitude).
If the aircraft needs to be turned on course, the controller will do so when able
(see Figure 10–13).
Southwest eighteen ninety-four Phoenix departure, radar contact, proceed on
course, climb and maintain flight level two one zero.

Once radar contact has been established and the pilot has been advised,
the controllers are permitted to use radar separation. They are not prohibited from using nonradar separation if that provides an operational advantage
though.
At this point, the controller may vector the aircraft to join the route of
flight while still complying with facility procedures and letters of agreement.
The controller also attempts to clear the aircraft to climb to the pilot’s requested
altitude as soon as is practical. If this is not possible because of a lack of jurisdiction or traffic conflicts, the aircraft will typically be cleared to the altitude
closest to that filed by the pilot.
If the aircraft will transit other subsectors within the terminal facility,
the departure controller must either hand off or point out the aircraft to the
appropriate controllers. Such handoffs are accomplished manually or through
the use of automated procedures. If the aircraft is remaining at a fairly low
altitude, it will usually be handed off to an adjoining terminal facility. But, if
the aircraft will fly at a sufficiently high altitude, it is generally handed off to
the appropriate ARTCC.

SW-4, 09 APR 2009 to 07 MAY 2009

Figure 10–13. Phoenix Departure chart.

SW-4, 09 APR 2009 to 07 MAY 2009

436 / CHAPTER 10

SW-4, 09 APR 2009 to 07 MAY 2009

Figure 10–13. (continued)

SW-4, 09 APR 2009 to 07 MAY 2009

Operation in the National Airspace System

/

437

438 / CHAPTER 10
Transfer of radar identification is the purpose of the “handoff.” So long
as the aircraft is handed off from one controller to the next, without a loss
of radar identification, the receiving controller can use radar separation rules
without reestablishing radar identification.
Phoenix departure control is assigned the airspace up to and including
FL 210. As the aircraft proceeds along the San Juan 3 departure procedure,
the departure controller will attempt, traffic permitting, to climb the aircraft
to FL 210. Prior to reaching that altitude, departure control will then hand the
airplane off to Albuquerque ARTCC (ZAB).
En route
Separation

The first en route controller who will separate the aircraft receives flight progress strip data shortly after the clearance delivery controller enters the departure time into the computer or after radar detects the aircraft’s transponder and
sends a message directly to the ARTCC computer. Subsequent controllers then
receive updated flight data approximately 15 to 30 minutes before the aircraft
enters each sector (see Figure 10–14). The flight data will then be displayed to
the controller either using paper flight progress strips or using the textual URET
flight planning function. The en route controllers use the information on the
flight strip to prepare for the separation of that flight. Once the ARTCC radar
system detects the aircraft’s transponder signal, a data block containing the
aircraft’s call sign, altitude, and airspeed appears on the controller’s display. At
the point delineated in the appropriate letter of agreement, the departure controller hands off the aircraft to the ARTCC controller.
Once the en route controllers have accepted a handoff, they are responsible for separating that aircraft from all others within the sector. This may be
somewhat difficult if the aircraft is sufficiently low and far enough away from

Figure 10–14. Phoenix departure traffic.

Operation in the National Airspace System

/

439

an ARTCC radar site that it remains undetected by radar. In such cases, the
aircraft will not appear on the ARTCC controllers’ radar display and must be
separated using nonradar procedures.
If the aircraft is operating below 18,000 feet MSL, it is typically separated
by controllers responsible for low-altitude aircraft, known as low-sector controllers. East of the Mississippi river, it is possible for some lower flying IFR
aircraft to continuously fly from one TRACON airspace to the next, without
ever entering the airspace of an ARTCC (see Figure 10–15).
ALBUQUERQUE ARTCC AND PHOENIX TRACON
LETTER OF AGREEMENT (excerpted)

PURPOSE: This letter of agreement delegates airspace, defines responsibilities, and establishes procedures
between Albuquerque ARTCC (ZAB) and Phoenix TRACON (P50) for approach control service in the
Phoenix, AZ terminal area.
CANCELLATION: Albuquerque ARTCC and Phoenix TRACON letter of agreement dated August 3,
1981.
SCOPE: The procedures herein are for the purpose of conducting IFR operations between Phoenix
TRACON and Albuquerque ARTCC within the airspace delegated to each facility.
PROCEDURES:
General
Deviations from procedures contained in this letter of agreement are authorized on an individual aircraft
basis after coordination between involved controllers.
Departures.
P50 TRACON shall:
1. Provide ZAB with five nm radar separation, constant or increasing, between aircraft.
2. Hand off aircraft to ZAB sector 38 climbing to FL210 or their assigned lower altitude.
3. Aircraft entering ZAB airspace shall be issued frequency 132.9.
ZAB shall:
1. Climb aircraft above FL210 as soon as practicable.
2. Assign appropriate departure procedures or issue vectors that place the aircraft through one of the
departure gates.
3. Keep aircraft on their assigned heading, route and airspeed while still within P50 airspace.
Arrivals
ZAB shall:
1. Assign appropriate arrival routes or issue vectors that place the aircraft through one of the arrival
gates.
2. Aircraft inbound to PHX shall be assigned an altitude of 12,000⬘ prior to handoff.
3. Provide P50 with five nm radar separation, constant or increasing, between aircraft.
4. Assign appropriate frequencies as advised by P50.
P50 Tracon shall:
1. Keep aircraft on their assigned heading, route and airspeed while still within ZAB airspace.
Figure 10–15. Phoenix TRACON/Albuquerque ARTCC Letter of Agreement.

440 / CHAPTER 10
However, if the aircraft climbs to a higher altitude, it will usually be handed
off to a high-altitude control sector. Once the aircraft reaches its assigned cruising altitude, it continues toward its destination, being handed off to different
controllers as it crosses sector boundaries. The controller constantly monitors
aircraft separation and makes routing adjustments as needed using the radar
display and URET predictions to ensure separation. If the pilot has any rerouting requests or the controller needs to issue any new routes, time permitting, the
URET will be used in a trial flight planning mode to determine if any possible
conflicts might occur.
The first of many ZAB sectors the example flight will transit is ZAB sector 38,
which borders and overlays PHX departure controls airspace. While the flight is still
climbing to FL 210, the PHX departure controller will initiate a radar handoff to
ZAB sector 38. This is typically accomplished using the automation equipment. In
general, as long as controllers are conforming to the appropriate letter of agreement,
an automated handoff is the preferred method of transferring radar identification.
The PHX departure controller initiates the handoff to the center, essentially causing
the aircraft’s data block to begin flashing on sector 38’s screen. With a simple click
of the trackball or a couple of keystrokes, the center controller accepts the handoff, and the data block flashes on the PHX departure controller’s radar indicating
acceptance. Once all potential TRACON traffic conflicts have been resolved, the
departure controller advises the pilot to contact the center controller.
Southwest eighteen ninety-four, contact Albuquerque Center on one three two
point niner.

This is the transfer of communications. When the aircraft comes up on
ZAB sectors 38’s frequency, if traffic permits, the controller will advise the pilot
to climb to their final cruising altitude.
Southwest eighteen ninety-four, climb and maintain flight level three five zero.

The transfer of control does not occur until the aircraft actually enters
sector 38. After it does, if there is any conflicting traffic while en route, the aircraft might be turned to avoid it or stopped at an intermediate altitude until the
traffic has passed. In any case, the pilot will be issued the instruction followed
by the reason for the alternate clearance.
Southwest eighteen ninety-four, climb and maintain flight level three one zero,
traffic opposite direction, an Airbus 330 flight level three two zero westbound.
Expect flight level three five zero in two zero miles.
Southwest eighteen ninety-four, turn two zero degrees right, traffic
passing on your left is an Airbus 330 flight level three two zero westbound.
Expect a vector back to the airway in two zero miles.

As the aircraft flies toward the destination airport, handoffs will occur
between subsequent sectors. Some will be within the center itself, and other
handoffs will be between adjacent ARTCCs (see Figure 10–16). While flying

Operation in the National Airspace System

/

441

Figure 10–16. Aircraft en route.

within each sector, it is the controller’s responsibility to maintain separation
with other aircraft climbing or descending within the airspace and level traffic
flying in the same, opposite, or crossing directions while complying with all
relevant procedures.
Once the aircraft is within 500 to 1,000 miles of the destination airport,
traffic flow management programs begin to add to the complexity of the en
route controller’s task. If long-term delays are expected at Indianapolis, the
departure might have been issued a ground delay. But, if unexpected weather
or other conditions causes a temporary loss of airport capacity at Indianapolis,
the aircraft might need to be delayed en route. There are two basic methods for
managing the flow of traffic into an impacted airport; miles in trail restrictions
and metering.
As aircraft approach the destination airport, each successive controller
begins to assign progressively lower altitudes. If the arrival airport is particularly busy, some form of traffic management might be needed. FAA traffic management programs attempt to match the inbound flow of traffic to the airport’s
acceptance rate, the calculated rate at which the airport can absorb traffic.
If, for instance, calculations show that a particular airport can handle sixty
aircraft operations in 1 hour, its theoretical acceptance rate is one per minute.
A general rule of thumb is that a single runway can handle thirty arrivals per

442 / CHAPTER 10
hour (one every 2 minutes) if the runway is being used for both arrivals and
departures. If the runway is being used solely for arrivals, a 1-minute interval
between aircraft can probably be maintained. This would permit the runway
to handle sixty aircraft per hour.
If two aircraft are scheduled to arrive at the airport at the same time, one of
the aircraft will be delayed for at least 1 minute. Such delays place a burden on the
approach controller, since only a limited amount of airspace is available to maneuver
aircraft. It becomes even more difficult to delay aircraft when more than two flights
are scheduled to arrive at the same time. In this situation, the approach controller
rapidly runs out of airspace in which to maneuver aircraft (a fairly common situation
that occurs routinely wherever airlines operate hub-and-spoke scheduling systems).
In general, it is FAA procedure to ensure that most of the delay is assigned
while en route and not in the busy terminal airspace. It is impossible to accurately project all flight paths with minute-by-minute accuracy, so generally it is
assumed that, if needed, aircraft can be delayed within TRACON airspace by
about 5 minutes. But, if more than 5 minutes of delay needs to be assigned to
any particular aircraft, it must be accomplished in ARTCC airspace. FAA procedures require that this delay be imposed far enough out so when the aircraft
crosses an imaginary arc about 200 nm from the destination airport, all of the
delay assigned to that flight has already been established (see Figure 10–17).

Figure 10–17. Aircraft nearing destination airport and 200 nm ring.

Operation in the National Airspace System

/

443

Miles in Trail
Restrictions

The minimum longitudinal separation for aircraft in en route airspace is
5 nm. For aircraft flying at or about 600 knots, this linear separation equates
to about 30 seconds of separation. Assume, for example, that a flow of traffic
is flying toward a destination airport from four directions and the airport can
safely handle sixty aircraft per hour (or one per minute). If the traffic is more
or less evenly distributed and spaced, fifteen aircraft per hour is the limit for
the aircraft coming in from each direction. To ensure that the aircraft arrive in
an orderly flow, the TRACON would ask that the four flows of traffic evenly
space each of their inbound aircraft 4 minutes (or 8 miles apart). This is called
a miles in trail (MIT) restriction. If the airport could safely land only thirty
aircraft per hour, they would most likely ask the center to double the separation
to fifteen or 16 miles in trail.

Metering

Metering is similar in its results but is a time-based traffic management system. The en route metering program calculates the airport’s acceptance rate
and determines the number of aircraft that can be handled in any given
5-minute period. If it is determined that the calculated airport acceptance rate
will be exceeded, the en route metering software at the ARTCC begins to
calculate appropriate delay strategies to temporarily reduce the number of
inbound aircraft.
The metering program dynamically determines specific times that aircraft
should cross en route fixes or distance arcs in order to delay each aircraft the
required interval. It then becomes each ARTCC radar controller’s responsibility
to ensure that the aircraft cross these fixes at the appropriate times. A rough
rule of thumb for en route delays is that approximately 1 minute of delay can
be established for every 30 to 50 nautical miles that an airplane flies. Therefore,
if the aircraft needs to be delayed 10 minutes for example, this delay needs to
start being imposed 500 to 700 miles from the destination airport such that the
airplane crosses the 200-nm arc at the appropriate time (see Figure 10–18).
The ATCSCC in conjunction with traffic management unit (TMU) controllers at each center determines the appropriate delay to be assigned to each
aircraft, then parses that delay out to each sector. The delay can be displayed
as either a time over a fix or a total delay needed to be extracted from each
aircraft. In the former, a list of aircraft IDs, metering fixes, and times to cross
each fix are displayed directly on the center controller’s display. It then becomes
the controller’s job to ensure that the aircraft crosses the assigned fix as close
as possible to the assigned crossing time. Another method involves having the
computer display in real time, which is the actual number of minutes that each
aircraft still needs to be delayed. This number is prominently placed next to the
aircraft’s data block. Using this system, it then becomes the controller’s option
how to establish the delay, with the only requirement being that the delay be
imposed prior to handing the aircraft off to the next sector.

Delay
Techniques

The three methods of establishing delay include vectoring, speed control, or
crossings restrictions. When vectoring an aircraft for a delay, the controller
issues a turn that takes the aircraft off course a defined distance and then allows

444 / CHAPTER 10

Metering fixes

Metering fixes

Cornerpost fixes

Airport
Cornerpost fixes

Metering fixes

Metering fixes

Figure 10–18. Traffic flow arriving in a major terminal. Aircraft first cross designated
metering fixes before crossing the cornerpost fixes.

the aircraft to return to course. This technique is commonly used if there is sufficient space within which to accomplish it inside the sector airspace.
Southwest eighteen ninety-four, turn left heading zero six zero, vector for
spacing.

Issuing speed restrictions is another method of en route spacing. Slowing
down one aircraft at the head of a line of flowing traffic causes the whole line to
slow down, which can cause a problem if those aircraft are flying to a different
airport that doesn’t have any flow control restrictions.
Southwest eighteen ninety-four reduce speed to three one zero.

Asking a pilot to cross a fix at a specific time is another commonly used
technique. With this technique, speed correction is the pilot’s responsibility, but
it needs to be monitored to ensure pilot compliance.

Operation in the National Airspace System

/

445

Southwest eighteen ninety-four, cross Bible Grove at zero two five six.

Our aircraft will continue along the route of flight passing from one sector to the next, leaving Albuquerque ARTCC’s airspace, transiting that of Kansas City center (ZKC), and finally entering Indianapolis center’s (ZID) airspace.
All of these controllers are required to safely separate aircraft while complying
with any and all applicable flow management instructions.
Approach
Control

About 200 miles from the Indianapolis airport, the controllers will begin to
descend the aircraft while beginning to sequence SWA1894 into the traffic flow
for the Indianapolis airport. This must all be accomplished while complying
with the procedures described in the Indianapolis Center/Indianapolis Tower
Letter of Agreement (see Figure 10–19). In particular, the center controller must
ensure that SWA1894 enters Indianapolis approach control airspace either at
or descending to 11,000 feet and enters over one of the designated arrival fixes.
The Kelly intersection, which is about 20 miles southwest of Indianapolis, and
part of the RACYR ONE STAR, is one such fix (see Figure 10–20).
Indianapolis TRACON controllers procedurally separate inbound and
outbound aircraft using a modification of a “box” system of procedural separation. In a typical box configuration, the letter of agreement describes a box
that is drawn around the affected TRACON’s airspace. Each corner of the box,
known as a cornerpost, is delineated by an intersection or navaid. At Indianapolis, the cornerposts are delineated by the Jells and Antti intersections to the
northwest, Clang to the northeast, the Shelbyville (SHB) VOR at the southeast,
and the Kelly intersection to the southwest. Where box systems are used, the
letter of agreement specifies that every inbound IFR aircraft must enter the
approach control’s airspace at one of the cornerposts. These areas are known
as arrival gates (see Figure 10–21). The letter of agreement also specifies that
departures must remain clear of the cornerposts and depart the area through
the sides of the box. The sides of the box are known as departure gates.
When the handoff has been accepted by the Indianapolis approach controller, SWA1894 is descended to 11,000 feet (as per the letter of agreement)
and is advised to contact the approach controller.
Southwest eighteen ninety-four, descend and maintain one one thousand,
contact Indianapolis approach control on one one niner point three.

Indianapolis
Approach
Control

The procedures at Indianapolis specify that as many as seven different controllers may be assigned approach and departure control responsibilities, corresponding to six control sectors (see Figures 10–22 [page 449] and 10–23
[page 450]). Two of these sectors are designated as arrival sectors and are
known as east arrival and west arrival, whereas the other four are departure
sectors known as north, south, east, and west departure. In this scenario, we
will assume that runway 5L is the primary runway in use at Indianapolis
International Airport. In this runway configuration, the two arrival controllers are assigned the airspace on both sides of runway 5L. Each departure

446 / CHAPTER 10

INDIANAPOLIS TOWER AND INDIANAPOLIS CENTER
LETTER OF AGREEMENT
SUBJECT: TERMINAL AREA CONTROL PROCEDURES

EFFECTIVE: January 1, 1989

PURPOSE:

To prescribe procedures to be used between Indianapolis ATCT and
Indianapolis ARTCC.

CANCELLATION:

Indianapolis ATCT and Indianapolis ARTCC Letter of Agreement
dated January 1, 1984.

SCOPE:

The procedures herein are for the purpose of conducting IFR
operations between Indianapolis ATCT and Indianapolis ARTCC.

RESPONSIBILITY:

Indianapolis ARTCC delegates to Indianapolis ATCT the authority
and responsibility for control of IFR terminal and en route
traffic at 10,000 feet and below.

ARRIVAL PROCEDURES:
CLEARANCE LIMIT
The destination airport shall be the arrival airport. Indianapolis ARTCC
shall clear arrivals via the metering fixes depicted on attachment #1.
ROUTES
The filed route shall be the arrival route unless suspended by either
facility. FDEP shall constitute approval and coordination.
ALTITUDES
Arrivals landing at any airport in Indianapolis ATCT’s delegated airspace
shall be cleared over one of the arrival fixes either level at or
descending to 11,000 feet. Indianapolis ATCT may descend these aircraft
below 11,000 feet once the transfer of communication has been accomplished.
DEPARTURE PROCEDURES:
Indianapolis ATCT shall ensure that departures are handed off with at least
5 miles radar separation that is constant or increasing.
Aircraft filing for 11,000 feet or higher must be restricted to 10,000 feet
until coordinated with Indianapolis ARTCC.
Indianapolis ATCT shall ensure that departures cross one of the four
departure gates shown on attachment #1 as NOIND, EAIND, SOIND, and WEIND.
FREQUENCIES
Indianapolis ARTCC to Indianapolis ATCT - 121.35 mHz or 285.65 mHz
Indianapolis ATCT to Indianapolis ARTCC - 132.20 mHz or 307.10 mHz

Figure 10–19. Letter of Agreement.

EC-2, 09 APR 2009 to 07 MAY 2009

Figure 10–20. RACYR One standard terminal arrival route.

EC-2, 09 APR 2009 to 07 MAY 2009

Operation in the National Airspace System

/

447

448 / CHAPTER 10

Figure 10–21. The arrival gates used by Indianapolis approach control.

controller is assigned a 90° segment of airspace delineated by the extended
centerlines of runway 5L-23R and 14-32.
In general, the arrival controllers are delegated the airspace at 3,000 feet,
7,000 feet, and 10,000 feet in all areas and from the surface up to 7,000 feet in
the area immediately surrounding the ILS runway 5L and 5R approaches. The
departure controllers are assigned the remaining airspace for their use. A short
description of each area and its purpose follows.
Areas 1, 1A, and 1B lie primarily between the approach gates and the
airport. Within these areas, the approach controller descends inbound aircraft
to 10,000 feet while the departure controller climbs departing aircraft to 9,000
feet. Area 2 is designated as a departure area and lies between the airport and
the departure gates. The approach controller is not typcially authorized to use
any of this airspace. Area 3 is used by the approach controller to vector aircraft
for the ILS approach, and inbound aircraft can descend to 3,000 feet within
this area. Area 4 is used for the ILS approach itself, and inbound aircraft are

Operation in the National Airspace System

/

449

Figure 10–22. Indianapolis approach control radar display.

authorized to operate between the surface and 7,000 feet. Areas 6A and 6B are
used by the local controller for departing aircraft and constitute the departure
fan. Area 6A is used by propeller-driven aircraft, which are initially restricted
to 2,500 feet. Area 6B extends to 6,000 feet and is used for jet departures. The
area above these altitudes is the responsibility of the departure controllers.
These altitude assignments are summarized in Table 10–1.
Typically, every inbound aircraft crosses one of the cornerposts either
level at or descending to 11,000 feet. Once the aircraft has entered Indianapolis TRACON’s assigned airspace, the arrival controller is permitted to descend
the aircraft to 10,000 feet. Every aircraft inbound to Indianapolis is vectored
toward the airport and sequenced behind other inbound aircraft. Once the
aircraft is within about 15 nautical miles of the airport (area 1), the arrival
controller is authorized to descend the aircraft to 7,000 feet if coordination has
been accomplished with the appropriate departure controller.
Southwest eighteen ninety-four, descend and maintain seven thousand, vector
for the ILS runway five left approach.

When SWA1894 is within about 15 miles of the airport, it has entered
area 1B, where the arrival controller may use the airspace extending from 7,000
feet to 3,000 feet MSL. At this point, the aircraft is usually turned onto the ILS
final approach course. Once in this position, traffic permitting, the aircraft will
be descended to 3,000 feet in preparation for the ILS approach.
Southwest eighteen ninety-four, fly heading zero four zero, descend and
maintain three thousand.

450 / CHAPTER 10

Figure 10–23. Arrival and departure areas as specified in Indianapolis facility procedures.

Aircraft coming in from one of the other three cornerpost fixes would
be placed on either a left or right extended downwind leg. Once the aircraft is
abeam the airport, the pilot is advised to contact the final approach controller.
The final controller is charged with merging the left and right downwind traffic
with the straight for the final ILS approach.
The final controller will determine the approach sequence and will space
the aircraft using either vectors or speed restrictions. When SWA1894 is in
the proper position, adequately separated from both preceding and following

Operation in the National Airspace System

451

/

Table 10-1.

Altitude Assignments at Indianapolis

Area

SFC-2,500

3,000

3,500

4,000

5,000

6,000

7,000

8,000

9,000

10,000

1

D

A*

D

D

D

D

A

D

D

A

1A

D

A*

D

D

D

D

A

D

D

A

1B

D

D

A

A

A

A

A

D

D

A

2

D

D

D

D

D

D

D

D

D

D

3

D

A

A

A

A

A

A

D

D

A

4

A

A

A

A

A

A

AD

D

A

A

6A

L

A

D

D

D

D

A

D

D

A

6B

L

L

L

L

L

L

A

D

D

A

A⫽A r r iv a l contr olle r ; D ⫽D e pa r t ur e cont rol l er; L⫽ L o ca l co n t ro l l er; * ⫽ V FR a l t i t u d es.

aircraft, the controller permits the aircraft to intercept the runway 5L localizer
and complete the approach (see Figure 10–24).
Southwest eighteen ninety four, seven miles from CENEK, turn left heading
zero three zero, intercept the final approach course at or above three thousand,
cleared for the ILS runway five left approach. Monitor tower on one two seven
point eight two and report Cenek inbound.

At all times while being vectored for the ILS approach, inbound aircraft
are procedurally separated from departing aircraft. The only coordination
involved between the approach and departure controllers occurs when the
arrival controller descends inbound aircraft from 10,000 feet to 7,000 feet.
One of the limitations on the arrival controllers is that very little airspace is
assigned for maneuvering aircraft close to the runway. The arrival controllers must keep each aircraft within the confines of areas 1B, 3, and 4 while
descending the aircraft to 3,000 feet MSL. Because of this lack of airspace, the
arrival controllers at Indianapolis become highly skilled at predicting the future
flight paths of aircraft and judiciously use speed adjustments to safely sequence
arrival aircraft while still confining these aircraft to the specified airspace.
Local Control

At Indianapolis tower, the local controller is responsible for sequencing
SWA1894 into the departure flow of traffic but has little flexibility to maneuver
the aircraft without coordinating with the controllers in the TRACON. If circumstances require, the local controller can clear SWA1894 to land on the
parallel runway, runway 5R, but may not assign SWA1894 to any other runway without coordinating with the controllers in the TRACON.
Southwest eighteen ninety four, cleared to land runway five left. Traffic is a
Cessna ahead and to your right landing runway five right.

452 / CHAPTER 10

Figure 10–24. ILS runway 5 left approach at Indianapolis.

Operation in the National Airspace System

/

453

Once SWA1894 has landed, the local controller advises the pilot to contact the ground controller, who clears the aircraft to taxi to the terminal.

Example of a VFR Flight
Lafayette to
Champaign

Pilots flying VFR are not required to file a flight plan but are encouraged by the
FAA to do so. The flight plan itself is not directly transmitted to air traffic control facilities but is instead used primarily to assist in the location of lost
aircraft.
Pilots who contact a flight service station for a VFR flight will receive
essentially the same weather briefing information as that given to an IFR pilot
but will have the briefing specifically arranged for them. Since Lafayette is within
the Terre Haute AFSS’s area of responsibility, the pilot of N252MN would typically call the Terre Haute Flight Service Station for this weather briefing. At the
conclusion of the weather briefing, the FSS specialist asks whether the pilot
wishes to file a flight plan. If the pilot does, the briefer enters the appropriate
information into the FSS computer (see Figure 10–25).
Ground Control When N252MN is ready to depart Lafayette, the pilot first
contacts the Lafayette ground controller and receives taxi clearance (“N252MN,
taxi to runway one zero”).
After taxiing to the active runway, the pilots contact the local controller
for departure instructions. The controller’s responsibility to VFR pilots is to
provide appropriate runway separation to each aircraft (“N252MN, Lafayette
tower, turn right on course, runway one zero cleared for takeoff”).
Once N252MN is airborne and clear of the Lafayette Class D airspace,
the pilots contact the Terre Haute Flight Service Station to “activate” their VFR
flight plan. A VFR flight plan is not activated automatically; it is up to the pilots
to initiate contact with the appropriate ATC facility (usually a flight service station) to activate the flight plan.
The pilots, for consistency, can contact the FSS in various ways. The first
method is to use a remote communications outlet (RCO) to the flight service
station. An RCO permits pilots to communicate with distant flight service stations using a single frequency. The radio transmitter and receiver are located
at an airport distant from the flight service station (in this case at the Lafayette
Airport) but are connected to it by telephone communications equipment. The
FSS specialist at Terre Haute can communicate with aircraft on the ground or
within the immediate vicinity of Lafayette using the Lafayette RCO. Remote
communications outlet frequencies are printed on VFR navigation charts (see
Figure 10–26).
Another method of communicating with a flight service station requires
the pilot to transmit on one frequency and receive the reply from the flight
service specialist on another frequency assigned to a navigation aid, usually a
VOR. These facilities can also be found on VFR navigation charts; the appropriate transmitting frequency is next to the navaid followed by the letter R

454 / CHAPTER 10

Figure 10–25. Sample VFR flight plan for N252MN’s simulated VFR flight from Lafayette to Champaign.

Operation in the National Airspace System

/

455

Figure 10–26. A remote communications outlet as depicted on a sectional chart.

(which indicates FSS receive only). The receiver is remotely connected to the
flight service station via telephone equipment. The FSS specialist in turn communicates with the pilot by transmitting on the VOR frequency, which does not
impair the operation of the VOR.
A third method of communicating with an FSS specialist requires that
the aircraft be within range of the FSS itself. Besides having their own discrete
frequencies, almost all FSSs have the capability of communicating using 122.2
mHz. If pilots are unsure of local FSS frequencies, they can almost always
establish communication on 122.2 mHz.
At Lafayette, the pilots of N252MN would probably contact Terre Haute
FSS on 122.35 mHz using a remote communications outlet. To activate their
flight plan, the pilots must advise the FSS specialist of their departure time
from Lafayette. The FSS specialist then enters the departure information into
the FSS computer. This causes the following information to be sent to the flight
service station with responsibility for Champaign, which in this case is the
St. Louis FSS:
Aircraft identification.
Aircraft type.
Destination.
Estimated time of arrival (ETA) at Champaign.

The St. Louis FSS computer returns an acknowledgment message to
Terre Haute Flight Service. Once the acknowledgment message has been sent,
N252MN becomes the responsibility of St. Louis if it becomes overdue.
En Route The pilots of N252MN are not required to establish contact with
any ATC facility while en route to Champaign. If the aircraft is within range
of a radar-equipped facility, however, the pilots can contact that facility and

456 / CHAPTER 10
request radar traffic advisories. Traffic advisories offered to VFR aircraft are
the same as those offered to IFR aircraft; VFR traffic advisories are offered to
pilots on a workload-permitting basis only.
If the pilots of N252MN were to encounter questionable or changing
weather conditions en route, a local flight service station could offer them some
assistance. The FSS specialist could offer weather advisories, forecasts, and pilot
reports of adverse weather conditions. Contact could be made with the flight
service station through an RCO or direct communications with an FSS using
122.2 mHz, or the pilot could request en route flight advisory service (EFAS).
EFAS is a weather advisory service provided by certain flight service stations
to en route VFR or IFR aircraft (see Figure 10–27). At these specially equipped
stations, an individual controller is on duty to provide timely weather information to en route aircraft. EFAS is not intended to be used for filing or opening
flight plans; it is designed to be used by pilots as a weather exchange service
only. The EFAS specialist has all of the most pertinent weather information
available, including real-time weather radar provided by the National Weather
Service (see Figure 10–28). In addition, the EFAS specialist constantly solicits
weather information from area pilots and controllers. The EFAS specialist is
thus able to provide timely weather and safety-related information to those
pilots who need it most. EFAS operates using a common frequency of 122.0
mHz. Pilots who desire to contact the EFAS specialist should broadcast their
position relative to the nearest VOR using this frequency. Since every EFAS
specialist monitors 122.0, the controller with the appropriate jurisdiction will
answer the pilot and provide the required information.
EFAS has been enormously successful, and therein lies its only major
problem. Since EFAS operates on a common frequency nationwide, it is possible for high-flying aircraft to interfere with EFAS transmissions over a number
of states at one time. To alleviate this problem, the FAA is beginning a program
of establishing discrete frequencies for aircraft using EFAS above 18,000 feet
MSL. High-altitude EFAS, as it is known, will provide a separate frequency for
use by aircraft operating at or above FL 180 within each ARTCC area.
Champaign Approach Control Once N252MN is within Champaign approach
control’s area of radar coverage (about 40 nautical miles), the pilots can contact the Champaign TRACON for radar traffic advisories. Although contact is
not mandatory at this distance, it is recommended in order to enhance safety
around busy terminal areas. The pilots of N252MN are required to contact
Champaign approach prior to entering the Champaign Class C airspace, however (see Figure 10–29).
Before the Champaign controller can provide radar service, N252MN
must be radar identified. This is accomplished in the same manner as with an
IFR aircraft. The controller notes the pilot’s reported position, assigns N252MN
a discrete transponder code, and verifies that the ARTS-II computer properly
acquires the code and generates an appropriate data block. In addition, the
controller may ask the pilot to activate the Ident feature of the transponder
(“N252MN, squawk four one two one and ident”).

Operation in the National Airspace System

Figure 10–27. En route flight advisory service.

/

457

458 / CHAPTER 10

Figure 10–28. Flight service station controller.

When N252MN has been radar identified, the controller advises the pilots
of their position and of the procedure that can be expected when entering the
traffic pattern at Champaign (“N252MN, radar contact two seven miles northeast of Champaign. Enter a right base for runway three two left”).
The approach controller then provides radar traffic advisories to
N252MN until the aircraft is within Class C airspace. Once N252MN enters
Class C airspace, the controller is required to
Sequence every aircraft inbound to the primary airport (Champaign).
Provide standard IFR separation between IFR aircraft.
Provide Class C separation criteria between IFR and VFR aircraft.
Provide traffic advisories and safety alerts between VFR aircraft.

Separation provided between IFR and VFR aircraft is not as stringent as
that applied to IFR aircraft. It is assumed that because VFR conditions exist,
both pilots can assist to ensure separation. Within Class C airspace, the controller is required to provide one of the following methods of separation between
an IFR and a VFR aircraft:
Visual separation
A 500-foot vertical separation
Lateral or longitudinal conflict resolution

When providing conflict resolution, the controller must ensure that the
displayed radar targets do not touch each other. In addition, both aircraft must
be issued the applicable traffic advisories concerning the other aircraft.
A radar controller is not required to separate two VFR aircraft but
must offer traffic advisories and safety alerts. A safety alert is defined by the

Operation in the National Airspace System

/

459

Figure 10–29. Champaign Class C airspace.

Aeronautical Information Manual as a condition in which, in the controller’s
judgment, the aircraft are in unsafe proximity. Whenever this condition arises,
the controller must issue a traffic advisory and offer the pilots an alternate
course of action that should resolve the situation. It is expected that because
both aircraft are in VFR conditions, they will assist in the conflict resolution
(“N252MN, traffic alert, traffic twelve o’clock and one mile, eastbound at
three thousand five hundred. Advise you turn left heading two four zero or
climb to four thousand immediately”).
Once N252MN has been appropriately separated from other inbound and
outbound aircraft, the controller must coordinate N252MN’s arrival sequence
with the west arrival controller. The pilots of N252MN are instructed to follow
another aircraft or are vectored to ensure proper spacing behind that aircraft.
When the sequence has been established and ensured, the pilots are advised to

460 / CHAPTER 10
contact the local controller (“N252MN, traffic you are following is a Lear at
twelve o’clock and five miles, contact the tower on one two zero point four”).
Local Control At this point, it becomes the local controller’s responsibility to
sequence N252MN into the local flow of traffic. As with IFR arrivals, when
N252MN is within 3 miles of the airport, the local controller can maneuver the
aircraft to another runway or to follow a preceding aircraft. When it is appropriate, the local controller issues landing clearance. After N252MN has landed,
the ground controller assumes responsibility for taxi instructions.
Closing the Flight Plan After N252MN has landed at Champaign, the pilots
contact St. Louis FSS to cancel their flight plan. This contact can be made using
the telephone or using the RCO at Champaign. The St. Louis FSS specialist
closes N252MN’s flight plan on receipt of this message from the pilot.
Overdue
Aircraft

If 30 minutes have elapsed since N252MN’s estimated time of arrival at Champaign and the St. Louis FSS specialist has not received N252MN’s flight plan
cancellation, N252MN is considered overdue. Once an aircraft is classified as
overdue, search and rescue (SAR) procedures are instigated.
During search and rescue operations, the destination FSS is responsible
for initiating every attempt to locate the aircraft. The first action that the
St. Louis controller takes is to send a QALQ message to every FAA facility at
an airport where N252MN may have landed. In addition, the QALQ message
is sent to the departure FSS (Terre Haute) and to every ARTCC within the area.
A QALQ message is a request for information concerning the overdue aircraft.
Any facility that receives a QALQ must briefly check with every controller and
examine recent flight strips to determine whether any contact has been made
with the overdue aircraft. Each of these facilities is required to answer the
QALQ request, even if no contact has been made with N252MN.
On receipt of a QALQ message, the departure FSS transmits all the pertinent flight plan information concerning N252MN to the St. Louis controller. This information is also transmitted to every facility that might have had
contact with N252MN.
Information Request If the replies to the QALQ request are all negative,
meaning that no FAA facility in the nearby area has located N252MN, St.
Louis FSS transmits an information request (INREQ) to the departure FSS,
to every flight watch FSS along N252MN’s route of flight, to other FSSs or
ARTCCs along N252MN’s planned route of flight, and to the Rescue Coordination Center (RCC) with responsibility for the area through which N252MN
would have been flying. In this example, the appropriate RCC is Langley Air
Force Base in Virginia.
On receipt of an INREQ message, every facility begins a check of facility
records to determine whether radio contact was made with N252MN. Every
FAA facility along N252MN’s route of flight, such as flight service stations,

Operation in the National Airspace System

/

461

towers, and ARTCCs, is also contacted to determine whether communication
with N252MN occurred. At the conclusion of these checks, a reply message is
transmitted to St. Louis FSS describing the results of the search.
Alert Notice If the replies to the INREQ are negative, the St. Louis FSS specialist transmits an alert notice (ALNOT) to every FAA facility within 50 miles
of N252MN’s proposed route of flight. These facilities then conduct a communications search of every airport within their immediate vicinity. In most cases,
the airport manager or operator is telephoned, and this individual conducts a
visual search of the airport property. If no one can be contacted at the airport,
local law enforcement personnel are requested to check for N252MN at the
airport. In addition, flight service stations within this area transmit a request
over the appropriate frequencies asking every airborne aircraft to monitor the
emergency frequency (121.5 mHz or 243.0 mHz) and listen for emergency
communications or a transmission from the emergency locator transmitter
(ELT) on board N252MN.
If an hour has elapsed since the original ALNOT transmission, the St.
Louis FSS contacts the Rescue Coordination Center and provides all the pertinent information about that flight to the RCC officer. If N252MN has not
been located by this time, the U.S. Air Force assumes complete responsibility
for locating N252MN and may initiate a ground and air search for the aircraft,
using the Civil Air Patrol.

KEY TERMS
acceptance rate
advisory database
Air Traffic Control System
Command Center (ATCSCC)
alert notice (ALNOT)
arrival gates
automated flight service station
(AFSS)
coded departure routes (CDR)
conflict resolution
departure controller
departure gates
Emergency locator transmitter
(ELT)

en route flight advisory service
(EFAS)
expect departure clearance time
(EDCT)
final controller
Flight Data Center (FDC)
flow constrained areas (FCA)
full route clearance (FRC)
high-altitude EFAS
information request (INREQ)
metering
miles in trail
notices to airmen (NOTAMs)
playbook router

QALQ message
radar traffic advisories
remote communications outlet
(RCO)
Rescue Coordination Center
(RCC)
safety alert
search and rescue (SAR)
severe weather avoidance plan
(SWAP)
traffic management unit (TMU)

462 / CHAPTER 10
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. What air traffic control services are routinely offered to IFR pilots but not VFR
pilots?
2. How are flight data transmitted to the appropriate facilities?
3. How are IFR aircraft traffic flows managed?
4. What types of ATC services are available to pilots?
5. How are lost and overdue aircraft assisted?

11
Oceanic and International
Air Trafﬁc Control
Checkpoints
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Describe the function of ICAO in international air trafﬁc control.
2. Describe reduced separation vertical minima.
3. Explain oceanic air trafﬁc control minima.
4. Describe operating procedures and separation minima within minima
navigation performance speciﬁcation airspace.

464 / CHAPTER 11
In this chapter, the air traffic control procedures used in areas adjacent to the
United States are explained, as are the procedures used by the FAA to separate
aircraft in international airspace. Because few controllers will ever have the
opportunity to control traffic in international airspace, this discussion is kept
brief. Emphasis is placed on those areas where FAA controllers are most likely
to control international air traffic, specifically Canadian and North Atlantic
airspace. Since Canada and the United States share one of the longest borders
in the world, many U.S. controllers may have an opportunity to control Canadian air traffic.

International Air Trafﬁc Control
The United States is a member of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) and therefore must abide by its requirements and regulations.
One of ICAO’s original goals was to standardize the world’s aviation systems
through the development and dissemination of suggested procedures for aviation regulatory agencies. The standards developed by ICAO are known as International Standards and Recommended Practices and are classified individually
as ICAO Annexes to the original Convention on International Civil Aviation
held in Chicago in 1944.
Every member of ICAO has agreed to generally abide by these Annexes
unless they must be modified to meet national needs. The adoption of these
procedures has permitted pilots to fly around the world using the same language (English), the same navigation aids (VOR, ILS, NDB, and MLS), and
the same procedures. Without the ICAO Annexes, every country would be free
to develop its own navigation systems, to use its own method for numbering airways and runways, and to use its native language (or languages) for
air traffic control. Through the perseverance of ICAO and the cooperation of
its members, international air travel is just about as easy as travel within the
United States.
The ICAO Annexes were adopted in 1944 and have been continuously
modified, adapted, and expanded since that time. Small changes to the original Annexes are made as amendments on an as needed basis, whereas major
changes are made during Air Navigation Conferences held every few years in
Montreal, Canada, the permanent headquarters of ICAO. At Air Navigation
Conferences, the member nations of ICAO meet to discuss, develop, and ratify
major additions and changes to the ICAO International Standards and Recommended Practices.
Up to this point, ICAO has approved eighteen Annexes and three Procedures for Air Navigation Services (PANS) that are to be used by member
nations when developing and operating their aviation systems. These Annexes
are as follows
Annex 1

Personnel Licensing

Annex 2

Rules of the Air

Oceanic and International Air Trafﬁc Control

/

465

Annex 3

Meteorology

Annex 4

Aeronautical Charts

Annex 5

Units of Measurement in Air-Ground Communications

Annex 6

Operation of Aircraft

Annex 7

Aircraft Nationality and Registration Marks

Annex 8

Airworthiness of Aircraft

Annex 9

Facilitation

Annex 10

Aeronautical Telecommunications

Annex 11

Air Traffic Services

Annex 12

Search and Rescue

Annex 13

Aircraft Accident Inquiry

Annex 14

Aerodromes

Annex 15

Aeronautical Information Services

Annex 16

Aircraft Noise

Annex 17

Security

Annex 18

Safe Transport of Dangerous Goods by Air

PANS-OPS

Procedures for Air Navigation Services—Aircraft
Operations

ICAO requires that every country publish manuals describing its ATC
system and any differences from ICAO standards. In the United States, these
publications are the International Flight Information Manual (IFIM) and the
Aeronautical Information Publication (AIP), published by the FAA. In general,
the United States conforms to most of the recommendations made by ICAO for
the operation of air traffic control systems. A few differences should be noted,
however.
ICAO recommends three types of aircraft operations: VFR, IFR, and
controlled VFR (CVFR). Controlled VFR flights are separated by controllers
as if they are IFR, but the pilots are not IFR rated and must remain in VFR
conditions. Controlled VFR is not used in the United States. ICAO also recommends phraseology not typically used in the United States. American pilots
and controllers pronounce decimal points as “point,” whereas ICAO recommends that it be pronounced “decimal.” U.S. en route facilities are known as
ARTCCs, whereas ICAO phraseology refers to such facilities as Area Control
Centers. Other than these few minor differences, the U.S. ATC system conforms
to ICAO standards.

Canadian Air Trafﬁc Control
Because Canada and the United States share one of the longest national borders in the world, the two nations’ air traffic control systems interact considerably. This interaction has led to the development of a highly coordinated

466 / CHAPTER 11
ATC system in which both countries have agreed to assist each other in many
areas. For example, in cases of small American airports fairly close to Canadian
ATC facilities, the FAA has delegated control for that airspace to the Canadian
government. Likewise, parcels of Canadian airspace have been delegated to
American ATC facilities.
For this governmental cooperation to come about, both countries’ air traffic
control systems had to be compatible with each other. Through discussions and
agreements between the FAA and Transport Canada (the Canadian governmental authority charged with the development, regulation, and operation of that
nation’s air traffic control system), both ATC systems have developed similarly.
The procedures used by Transport Canada are in many respects similar to those
used by American controllers. They are so similar in fact, that in 1985 the United
States and Canada signed an agreement recognizing the inherent safety of each
other’s ATC system. More important, the agreement permits the controllers of
one country, when authorized to separate aircraft flying over the other, to use
the procedures developed by the home country to separate those aircraft. In
other words, in areas where Canada has authorized the FAA to separate aircraft
within Canadian airspace, the FAA controllers may use FAA procedures. In U.S.
airspace that the FAA has delegated to Canada, the Canadian controllers may
use Canadian procedures to separate American aircraft.

International Airspace
The ICAO agreements specify that every nation will control its own sovereign
airspace but will permit ICAO to determine who shall provide air traffic control
service within international airspace. Since ICAO is only a voluntary regulatory body and does not provide any direct air traffic control service, international ATC has been delegated to those member nations willing to accept this
responsibility. ICAO has assigned a fairly large area of international airspace
to the United States within which the FAA provides air traffic control service.
Because this airspace does not actually belong to the United States, the rules
and regulations applicable to U.S. pilots and controllers do not always apply in
this airspace. The appropriate rules of operation are found in ICAO Annex 2
(Rules of the Air) and Procedures for Air Navigation Services. These procedures
are considered as supplements to the FAA handbook and are used when offering international air traffic control services.
U.S. pilots and controllers are required by the FARs to conform with
Annex 2 when operating in international airspace. FAR 91.1 states, “When
over the high seas, comply with Annex 2 (Rules of the Air) to the Convention on International Civil Aviation.” Most foreign aircraft operators are also
required by their government regulations to conform with Annex 2.
ICAO has divided the airspace of the world into flight information regions
(FIRs). These regions identify which country controls the airspace and determines which procedures are to be used. For the purpose of en route ATC,

Oceanic and International Air Trafﬁc Control

/

467

usually one major air traffic control facility is identified with each FIR. In the
United States, this would be the air route traffic control center. In the rest of the
world, these facilities are known as area control centers (ACC).
The boundaries of each FIR typically follow the geopolitical boundary
of the underlying country, but in some cases, individual nations have agreed
to grant control authority of their airspace to area control centers located in
other countries. In oceanic airspace, certain countries have agreed to provide
ATC service outside of their national boundaries. Although the countries do
not have political ownership of the airspace, the aeronautical regulations of
most ICAO member countries require that their pilots abide by the rules and
procedures used by the ACC controlling the oceanic airspace.
Air traffic control procedures common to the United States may very
often be lacking in some airspace around the world. Limited facilities and
differing national priorities often require less emphasis on providing ATC as
sophisticated as that in the United States In many areas of the world, much
of the upper airspace is designated class G airspace, a classification unused
in the United States. Within class G airspace, both IFR and VFR flights are
permitted and aircraft will receive flight information, if available. This is often
limited to reports of known aircraft and weather conditions. In many areas
of the world, pilots provide much of their own separation. Using a common
radio frequency, pilots operating in class G airspace transmit their location and
altitude at regular time intervals. When approaching common fixes or nav-aids,
the pilots transmit their location, altitude, and estimated crossing times. If two
aircraft seem to be in close proximity to one another, the pilots are responsible
for informing each other and altering their routes and altitudes accordingly.
Procedures such as these are most often used in less developed nations. Even
in these areas, more sophisticated equipment and procedures common to the
United States are used in the areas surrounding major metropolitan areas.
Airport
Identiﬁers

ICAO has an established method of issuing unique identifiers for every commercial airport in the world. This format is different from that used by the
International Air Transport Association (IATA) to identify airports. IATA uses
a three-letter format, whereas ICAO uses a four-letter system. IATA’s coding
format is used primarily by travel agents and airline personnel. The ICAO format is used exclusively in air traffic control.
The ICAO system breaks down the four-letter code into three segments.
The first segment identifies the area of the world (the aeronautical fixed service
routing area or AFSRA) in which the airport is located. The second segment identifies the specific country, and the third segment identifies the particular airport.
For example, the ICAO airport code of EHAM is assigned to the Amsterdam-Schiphol airport. The letter E in the airport code identifies the airport as
being located in northern Europe. The H specifies the Netherlands, and the
AM is the code assigned to the Amsterdam-Schiphol airport. In contrast to this
system, the IATA code for Schiphol used by airlines and travel agents is AMS.
The only exceptions to this coding scheme are the United States and China.
These countries have so many commercial airports that they have unique first

468 / CHAPTER 11
letters assigned just to their country: Z for China and K for the United States
(although airports in Alaska and Hawaii are identified with the Pacific Ocean
letter P). The second, third, and fourth letters are assigned to specific airports
in these countries. Over 10,000 airport codes are in use worldwide. The first
letter of the codes for AFSRA are as follows:
Code Letter

Region

A

Southwest Pacific

B

North Atlantic

C

Canada

D

North Africa

E

Northern Europe

F

South Africa

G

West Africa

H

Central Africa

K

United States of America

L

Southern Europe

M

Central America

N

Pacific Islands

O

Middle East

P

Hawaii and Alaska

R

Eastern Asia and Japan

S

South America

T

Caribbean and Virgin Islands

U

Northern Europe and Russia

V

South Asia

W

Southeast Asia

Z

China

Some selected second letters of the codes include the following:
Location

Code Letter

Alaska

A

Bolivia

L

Brazil

B

Canada

Y

Chile

C

Columbia

K

Egypt

E

France

F

Germany

D

Oceanic and International Air Trafﬁc Control
Greece

G

Hawaii

H

Iceland

I

India

E

Ireland

I

Italy

I

Japan

J

Korea

K

Mexico

M

Netherlands

H

New Zealand

Z

Peru

P

Philippines

P

Russia

H

Saudi Arabia

E

South Africa

A

Spain

E

Ukraine

K

Virgin Islands

I

/

469

A sample of the airport codes used by the ICAO and IATA follows. A
more complete list is included in Appendix C.
ICAO Code

IATA Code

City

Country

Airport

CYMX

YMX

Montreal

Canada

Mirabel International

EDDF

FRA

Frankfurt

Germany

Rhein Main

EGLL

LHR

London

England

Heathrow

KATL

ATL

Atlanta

Georgia

Hartsfield International

PAFA

FAI

Fairbanks

Alaska

International

PHNL

HNL

Honolulu

Hawaii

International

ZBAA

BJS

Beijing

China

Capital

European Air Trafﬁc Control
Air traffic control in Europe is similar to that in the United States. The only difference is that in Europe, each country provides its own ATC system. The result
is as if each state in the United States had its own ATC system. In an effort to
better coordinate Europe’s air traffic system, Eurocontrol was formed.
Eurocontrol, the European Organization for the Safety of Air Navigation, has 38 member states: Albania, Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland,

470 / CHAPTER 11
France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, and the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Eurocontrol was founded in 1960 to oversee air traffic control in the
upper airspace of member states; but due to political considerations, it was
never able to operate as planned. Today, Eurocontrol has as its most important goal the development of a coherent and coordinated air traffic control
system in Europe. Its primary objectives are to manage the implementation
of the European Air Traffic Control Harmonization and Integration Program
(EATCHIP), as well as a series of associated concepts and future strategies.
Eurocontrol also operates the central flow management unit (CFMU), which
operates similar to the ATCSCC in Washington, D.C. An additional mission
is to carry out research and development work aimed at increasing air traffic
control capacity in Europe.
Eurocontrol’s Maastricht Upper Area Control Center was Europe’s first
international air traffic control center. The center was founded by Eurocontrol
at the request of Belgium, Luxembourg, Netherlands, and Germany. It provides air traffic control services in the upper airspace (24,500 feet) of one of
the busiest regions of Europe: the airspace over Belgium, Luxembourg,
Netherlands, and part of Germany.

Atlantic Ocean Air Trafﬁc Control
The most highly congested international airspace controlled by the FAA is over
the North Atlantic Region (NAR). The high traffic in this airspace becomes
congested because of the time zone differences between North America and
Europe. Most of the traffic across the North Atlantic between 8:00 a.m. and
3:00 p.m. EST (1300Z and 2000Z) is westbound. Aircraft leave Europe in
the morning and arrive in North America in the early afternoon. Eastbound
traffic is most concentrated between 8:00 p.m. and 3:00 a.m. EST (0100Z and
0800Z), leaving North America in the evening and arriving in Europe in the
early morning. Because of this highly directional and concentrated traffic flow,
special procedures have been developed for this airspace.
The North Atlantic airspace is delegated to seven air traffic control facilities. The FAA facilities are the New York and San Juan ARTCCs, and the
remainder of the airspace is divided among area control centers in Greenland,
Newfoundland, Great Britain, Iceland, and the Azores.
ICAO standards specify that all of the airspace at or above 5,500 feet MSL
within this area is controlled airspace. The airspace below 5,500 feet MSL is
uncontrolled. ICAO also specifies that the transition level over the North Atlantic begins at 5,500 feet MSL. This means that pilots flying at or above 5,500
feet are required to adjust their altimeters to standard pressure (29.92 Hg).

Oceanic and International Air Trafﬁc Control

/

471

Since these altitudes are no longer true altitudes, they are known as flight levels.
Unlike in the United States, however, the lowest flight level over the Atlantic is
FL 55 (compared to FL 180 over the continental United States).
This difference in transition altitudes (5,500 feet versus 18,000 feet) can
create some separation difficulties as aircraft enter or leave U.S. airspace. An
aircraft arriving from Europe at FL 170 would have its altimeter set to 29.92.
Once the aircraft enters U.S. airspace, however, the pilot would read just the
altimeter to the local station pressure (let us assume that it is 29.82). When
the altimeter has been readjusted, it would indicate that the aircraft is level at
16,900 feet MSL, not at 17,000. Although the pilot would certainly begin an
immediate climb to 17,000, if an aircraft had been directly below at 16,000, a
temporary loss of separation would already have occurred. Thus, controllers
must be careful when aircraft pass horizontally through a transition level while
in level flight.
North Atlantic
Separation

Aircraft operating over the North Atlantic are separated using nonradar techniques, since radar service is not available over most of this route. This non
radar separation must be expanded from that used within the United States
because of a number of factors that may affect aircraft in flight. The separation
intervals must necessarily be increased, since radio communication is difficult
to maintain over this distance. In addition, since aircraft cannot be directly
observed and position determination is less accurate over the Atlantic, the separation interval between aircraft is increased. All of these factors combine to
decrease the capacity of the North Atlantic airways.
Primarily two sets of airways are used by flights over the Atlantic Ocean.
The first is a series of one-way airways at fairly low altitudes, which are
commonly used by single- or multi engine propeller-driven aircraft. Aircraft
operating on these routes are typically within range of VHF communications
facilities and can use VOR or NDB navigation facilities. Most of these airways
are designed such that flight over water is reduced to a minimum. The other set
of airways is a flexible system of changing airways primarily used by airline,
military, and business jet operators. These airways can be used only by aircraft equipped with accurate area navigation equipment. Within this airspace,
known as minimum navigation performance specifications airspace (MNPSA
or MNPS airspace), only those aircraft that are properly equipped and certified
may operate. Within this airspace, separation intervals are reduced and the airspace is used more efficiently. MNPS airspace exists primarily above FL 275; it
is explained in detail later in this chapter.
Within non-MNPS airspace, aircraft must still be separated using vertical,
lateral, or longitudinal separation techniques. The application of these techniques is similar to the methods used by domestic air traffic controllers, but the
separation interval has been proportionally increased.
Vertical Separation Vertical separation is applied to oceanic aircraft in exactly
the same manner as it is applied to domestic aircraft. Aircraft operating up to
and including FL 450 are separated by a 2,000-foot vertical interval. The only

472 / CHAPTER 11
difference between domestic and oceanic vertical separation occurs with supersonic and high-altitude military aircraft. Because of the high airspeeds involved
and the inherent inaccuracies of barometric altimeters at high altitudes, supersonic aircraft operating above FL 450 must be separated from nonsupersonic
aircraft by a 4,000-foot vertical interval. Military aircraft operating above FL
600 must be separated by a 5,000-foot vertical interval.
Lateral Separation Since the distance between navaids on the North Atlantic
airways is much greater than on domestic routes, the airways are wider than
those within the continental United States. Because aircraft operating on oceanic routes cannot be observed on radar, increased lateral separation must be
used between aircraft operating on parallel routes at the same altitude. When
providing lateral separation within oceanic airspace, the controller must still
assign aircraft routes whose protected airspaces do not overlap, but the widths
of these routes will vary depending on the type of aircraft using the route, the
length of the oceanic route, and the aircraft’s altitude.
Supersonic aircraft operating above FL 275 anywhere over the North
Atlantic must be laterally separated by 60 nautical miles. Aircraft operating
between North America and Bermuda at any altitude must be separated by 90
nautical miles. Any other aircraft operating over the North Atlantic must be
laterally separated by at least 120 nautical miles.
Longitudinal Separation Longitudinal separation can also be applied to
oceanic aircraft, but great care must be taken to ensure that the following
aircraft never overtakes the leading aircraft. This is accomplished by ensuring
that the faster aircraft is the leading aircraft or, if this is not possible, by
assigning the following aircraft a particular airspeed to ensure that it will not
overtake the leading aircraft.
Within North Atlantic airspace, a 10-minute longitudinal separation interval must be maintained between supersonic aircraft; a 20-minute separation interval must be maintained between nonsupersonic, turbojet-powered aircraft; and
a 30-minute separation interval must be maintained between all other aircraft.
MNPS
Airspace
Operations

As a result of increased traffic demand, time zone restrictions, and aircraft performance characteristics, most of the North Atlantic aircraft operations occur
within a fairly small block of airspace. This block extends from the northeastern United States to Great Britain and from about FL 285 to FL 420. Because
of the constraints placed on controllers when separating aircraft within this
area, it can become highly congested at peak operating times. To maximize the
usage of this airspace, a system of flexible, organized tracks has been developed that replaces the typical airway structure used for air traffic control (see
Figures 11–1 and 11–2). These tracks exist in MNPS airspace.
MNPS airspace lies between the North Pole and the 27th parallel and
between FL 285 and FL 420. It is located within several flight information
regions controlled by the New York ARTCC and by the Shanwick, Gander,
Sondestrom, and Santa Maria Oceanic Area Control Centers (OACC).

Oceanic and International Air Trafﬁc Control

/

Figure 11–1. Typical westbound traffic flow and tracks over the North Atlantic
Region.

Figure 11–2. Typical eastbound traffic flow and tracks over the North Atlantic
Region.

473

474 / CHAPTER 11
In an attempt to maximize the use of this limited airspace, international
agreements have reduced the separation interval between aircraft operating on
these tracks. In return, increased accuracy and reliability of onboard aircraft
navigational systems are required. The International Air Transport Association
(IATA), in cooperation with ICAO and its member nations, has developed this
organized track system and the associated aircraft equipment requirements.
Both are described in the North Atlantic MNPS Airspace Operations Manual.
Aircraft operating on these tracks are required by the air regulations of their
home nation to have the appropriate equipment described in the minimum navigation performance specifications published by the IATA. These specifications require
that every aircraft be equipped with two independent, long-range area navigation
systems, such as inertial navigation or GNSS, and appropriate high-frequency communication equipment. (High-frequency communication is required since VHF is
line of sight and cannot be used during most of the oceanic flight.)
Typically, the organized tracks are developed approximately 24 hours
before they are actually to be used. Track development takes into consideration
the winds aloft and the weather that may be encountered en route, the anticipated number of aircraft that will be traveling in each direction, and the impact
the tracks will have on adjacent and adjoining ATC facilities.
When the factors have been determined, the organized track system for
the next day is provided to potential ATC system users and the ATC facilities
themselves. In most cases, two track systems are published. The first is primarily designed for westbound traffic and is effective from 6:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
EST (1100Z–2200Z). The second track system is designed primarily for eastbound traffic and is in effect from 7:00 p.m. to 4:00 a.m. EST (0000Z–0900Z).
The time interval between these two track systems is used to clear any late
aircraft from the system before the tracks are reversed.
Since the actual locations of the tracks change daily, a fairly simple system of naming each track has been developed. This naming scheme informs
the pilots of each track location and whether it is eastbound or westbound. The
early-morning, westbound tracks are labeled A (Alpha) through K (Kilo). The
northernmost track is Alpha and the southernmost is Kilo. The late-afternoon,
eastbound tracks are Uniform through Zulu, with the northernmost track
being Uniform. Position reports are typically made at every point where the
track crosses a meridian at intervals of 10° of longitude.
The following is a sample MNPS track message:
ATC DELAYS AND ADVISORIES
ATCSCC ADVZY 015 DCC 03/27/98 ZBW NATS
ZBW NORTH ATLANTIC ADVISORY FOR 03/27/98 2000Z
03/28/98
0400Z
AIRCRAFT DEPARTING JFK PLEASE FILE THE FOLLOWING
ROUTES TO MINIMIZE DEPARTURE
DELAYS DESTINED TO EUROPE:

Oceanic and International Air Trafﬁc Control

/

475

TRACK U/ JFK. GREK12. MARTN..EBONY.N95B.CYMON.TRAKU
TRACK V/ JFK.MERIT2.PUT.WITCH..ALLEX.N79B.YQX.TRAKV
TRACK W/ JFK.BETTE2.ACK..TUSKY.N63B. VIXUN.TRAKW
TRACKX/ JFK.BETTE2.ACK..BRADD.N53B.YYT.TRAKX
TRACK Y/ JFK.HAPIE2 YAHOO. .KANNI.N45A.COLOR.TRAKY
ANY QUESTIONS CALL ZBW TMU AT 6038867666
NAT1/2 TRACKS FLS 310/390 INCLUSIVE
MAR 28/0100Z TO MAR 20/0800Z
U CYMON 51/50 52/40 53/30 54/20 54/15 BABAN
EAST LVLS 310 320 330 340 350 360 370 380 390
WEST LVLS NIL
EUR RTS WEST NIL
NAR N95B N97B
V YQX 50/50 51/40 52/30 53/20 53/15 BURAK
EAST LVLS 310 320 330 340 350 360 370 380 390
WEST LVLS NIL
EUR RTS WEST NIL
NAR N79B N83B
W VIXUN 49/50 50/40 51/30 52/20 52/15 DOLIP
EAST LVLS 310 320 330 340 350 360 370 380 390
WEST LVLS NIL
EUR RTS WEST NIL
NAR N63B N67B
X YYT 48/50 49/40 50/30 51/20 51/15 GIPER
EAST LVLS 310 320 330 340 350 360 370 380 390
WEST LVLS NIL
EUR RTS WEST NIL
NAR N53B N55A
Y COLOR 57/50 48/40 49/30 50/20 50/15 KENUK
EAST LVLS 310 320 330 340 350 360 370 380 390
WEST LVLS NIL
EUR RTS WEST NIL
NAR N45A N49A
NAT2/2 TRACKS FLS 310/390 INCLUSIVE
MAR 28/0100Z TO MAR 28/0800Z
Z BDA 33/60 35/50 39/40 43/30 47/20 OMOKO GUNSO
EAST LVLS 330 350 370
WEST LVLS NIL
EUR RTS WEST NIL
NAR NIL
REMARKS
1. SEE INTERNATIONAL NOTAMS A0666/98 AND C0507/98
REGARDING REVISED CLEARANCE DELIVERY PROCEDURE FOR
EASTBOUND AIRCRAFT EXITING THE GANDER DOMESTIC FIR.

476 / CHAPTER 11
2. TRACK MESSAGE IDENTIFICATION 087.
3. MNPS AIRSPACE EXTENDS FROM FL285 TO FL420. OPERATORS ARE REMINDED THAT SPECIFIC MNPS APPROVAL IS
REQUIRED TO FLY IN THIS AIRSPACE.
4. 40 PERCENT OF GROSS NAVIGATIONAL ERRORS OCCUR AFTER
A REROUTE. ALWAYS CARRY OUT WAYPOINT CROSS CHECKS.
NAT1/2 TRACKS FLS 310/390 INCLUSIVE
MARCH 27/1130Z TO MARCH 27/1800Z
A 55/10 57/20 59/30 59/40 58/50 PORGY HO
EAST LVLS NIL
WEST LVLS 310 320 330 340 350 360 370 380 390
EUR RTS WEST NIL
NAR N284B N292C N294C N298G N302C N304E N306C N308E
N312A
B 54/15 55/20 56/30 56/40 54/50 CARPE REDBY
EAST LVLS NIL
WEST LVLS 310 320 330 340 350 360 370 380 390
EUR RTS WEST BABAN
NAR N204B N206C N210C
C 53/15 54/20 55/30 55/40 53/50 YAY
EAST LVLS NIL
WEST LVLS 310 320 330 340 350 360 370 380 390
EUR RTS WEST BURAK
NAR N184B N188B N192B
D 52/15 53/20 54/30 54/40 52/50 DOTTY
EAST LVLS NIL
WEST LVLS 310 320 330 340 350 360 370 380 390
EUR RTS WEST DOLIP
NAR N162B N164B
E 51/15 52/20 53/30 53/40 51/50 CYMON
EAST LVLS NIL
WEST LVLS 310 320 330 340 350 360 370 380 390
EUR RTS WEST GIPER
NAR N142B N148B
F 50/15 51/20 52/30 52/40 50/50 YQX
EAST LVLS NIL
WEST LVLS 310 320 330 340 350 360 370 380 390
EUR RTS WEST KENUK
NAR N124B N130C
Since controllers have no radar image of the aircraft, they instead build
up a picture of traffic using position reports sent from the aircraft, mainly using
high-frequency voice radio. These position reports usually follow this format:
airline name, flight number, current position, time and flight level, next position, estimated time at next position, followed by the next position after that.

Oceanic and International Air Trafﬁc Control

/

477

Usually the reports will be a mixture of coordinates and reporting points. An
example would be
Delta 112, 54 North 20 West at 0634, Flight Level 350, estimating 53 North 15
West at 0656, BURAK next.

This would be written by the controller on a flight strip in the following
format:
DAL112 54N20W 0634 F350 53N15W 0656 BURAK

Using these reports, in conjunction with the flight progress strips and
maps depicting the route tracks, controllers ensure that there is always separation between all aircraft.
MNPS
Airspace
Separation

Aircraft operating along the organized track system are separated vertically, as
previously described in this chapter. The primary difference between normal
oceanic separation and MNPSA separation is the reduction of both lateral and
longitudinal separation.
Lateral Separation Because of the navigation equipment accuracy required
and because each aircraft carries a redundant navigational system, the lateral
separation interval within MNPS airspace can be reduced to 60 nautical miles.
This can be accomplished only as long as both aircrafts’ navigational systems
remain operational. If one of them fails, the appropriate ATC facility will begin
to separate the aircraft using 120 nautical miles of lateral separation. This can
be fairly difficult, given the traffic and communications constraints and considering that the controller is using flight progress strips to separate the aircraft.
Longitudinal Separation Within MNPS airspace, longitudinal separation intervals can be significantly reduced over those used in normal oceanic airspace. If
the pilots are capable of determining and maintaining a particular mach airspeed, the separation interval can be reduced even further. Mach is a means of
measuring airspeed as a percentage of the speed of sound and is a much more
reliable method of determining the airspeed of a high-altitude aircraft.
If the leading aircraft operates at the same airspeed or is faster than the following aircraft and both aircraft’s mach speed cannot be determined, a 10-minute longitudinal separation interval is sufficient. However, if each aircraft’s mach number can
be determined, longitudinal separation can be reduced to the following values:
If the leading aircraft is .02 mach faster than the following aircraft, longitudinal
separation can be reduced to 9 minutes.
If the leading aircraft is .03 mach faster than the following aircraft, longitudinal
separation can be reduced to 8 minutes.

478 / CHAPTER 11
If the leading aircraft is .04 mach faster than the following aircraft, longitudinal
separation can be reduced to 7 minutes.
If the leading aircraft is .05 mach faster than the following aircraft, longitudinal
separation can be reduced to 6 minutes.
If the leading aircraft is .06 mach faster than the following aircraft, longitudinal
separation can be reduced to 5 minutes.

Pacific Flight Routes Flights from the United States to and from Asia typically
fly in one of two designated areas known as northern Pacific or central Pacific
routes. The northern Pacific (NOPAC) route system comprises five routes that
connect Alaska and Japan. The northern routes are generally used for westbound traffic. The southern routes are generally used for eastbound traffic.
Similar to aircraft operations over the north Atlantic, aircraft are separated
by altitude, route, and mach number as they leave domestic airspace. Communication with Anchorage ARTCC near the coast is conducted using VHF
radio, while over the ocean HF radio is primarily used. Anchorage ARTCC
borders the Tokyo Area Control Center along this route structure. The airway
system itself does not enter Russian airspace but borders it just to the south
(see Figure 11–3).
Within the central pacific (CENPAC) area, there are six fixed routes available from the west coast of the United States to Hawaii (see Figure 11–4).
Due to the amount of traffic and the length of the routes, a flexible track system similar to that over the Atlantic has been established between Japan and
Hawaii. This system is called the Pacific organized track system (PACOTS).
PACOTS routes are published daily. The same separation rules and procedures
used in NOPAC are used on these routes. RNP definition of the routes is more
commonplace, however, permitting a more efficient use of the airspace.

Figure 11–3. NOPAC routes between Alaska and Japan.

Oceanic and International Air Trafﬁc Control

/

479

Figure 11–4. CENPAC routes between the west coast and Hawaii.

Oakland ARTCC controls the majority of this airspace. Oakland is
responsible for nearly 20 million square miles of airspace over the Pacific. The
Oakland flight information region (FIR) extends from the west coast of the
United States and borders that of Tokyo, Manila, Mexico, Tahiti, Auckland,
Nadi, Port Moresby, and Biak. Honolulu ARTCC controls a small section of
airspace immediately surrounding the Hawaiian Islands (see Figure 11–5).

480 / CHAPTER 11

Figure 11–5. Oakland ARTCC oceanic airspace.

While flying over the Pacific, pilots communicate with the appropriate
ARTCC or area control center via HF oceanic radio stations. Aircraft reports,
messages, and requests are relayed by the station to the appropriate air traffic
control center via telephone, computer, or data message.
ATOPS/Ocean
21

Within both Atlantic and Pacific airspaces, FAA controllers monitor aircraft
position using advanced technologies and oceanic procedures (ATOPS) equipment. ATOPS replaced the old oceanic air traffic control systems and procedures at Oakland, New York, and Anchorage ARTCCs. The ATOPS system
integrates flight and radar data processing, accepts manually entered aircraft
position information, and displays aircraft location data electronically to controllers using a graphical display. It can also detect conflicts between aircraft,
provide data link, and automate the manual processes previously used by controllers. As ADS-B becomes more prevalent, it will accept aircraft position data
from that system as well (see Figure 11–6).
When fully integrated with RNP and ADS-B, ATOPS will reduce the
required separation over some areas from 50 nm to 30 nm and possibly to as
little as 10 nautical miles laterally and longitudinally. ATOPS will also reduce
controller workload through the use of electronic flight strips instead of the
paper strip method previously used to control transoceanic aircraft.”

Trans-Polar
Flights

As traffic between the east coast of the United States and Asia increases, the use
of trans-polar routes reduces flight times, thereby reducing airspace congestion
and increasing airline efficiency. More and more airlines are beginning to use

Oceanic and International Air Trafﬁc Control

/

481

Figure 11–6. ATOPS display of aircraft.

trans-polar routes, but there are some substantial problems associated with
their use that have to be overcome before they can be fully used.
Alternate
Airports and
Fuel
Temperature

Much of the territory covered by trans-polar flights offer very few alternate
landing areas in the case of an aircraft engine or system problem. The atmosphere over the poles is particularly cold at cruising altitude, causing fuel flow
and freezing problems. Aircraft manufacturers, as well as the airlines, are
attempting to reduce these problems through the establishment of a network of
emergency landing airfields and navigation aids located in these remote areas.
Fuel temperature problems while in flight are difficult to contend with
as it is impractical to heat the large quantities of fuel present in a modern
airliner. The fuel placed on board the aircraft prior to departure is relatively
warm (ambient air temperature) and might even heat up a little in flight due to
air friction across the wings. However, as the fuel quantity decreases and the
air temperature at cruise drops significantly, the temperature of the remaining
fuel can drop low enough that fuel flow problems develop. Additionally, fuel
crystallization that reduces fuel flow to unacceptable levels can occur.
Before departing on a trans-polar flight, the flight crew must calculate the
probable fuel temperature loss that can be expected. The crew must also monitor the fuel temperature while in flight and may need to make altitude or route
adjustments to keep the fuel within the correct temperature range. In extreme
cases, these flights might need to seek different routes, reverse course, or even
land at an alternative field if the flight crew projects that the fuel temperature
will become unacceptably low.

482 / CHAPTER 11
Communication Trans-polar operators need to be equipped with many different modes of communication to ensure that contact can be maintained with ATC during the
and
entire flight. In general, each aircraft must be equipped with very high freNavigation
quency, high frequency, and satellite voice communication as well as data link
equipment. The same navigation equipment required for north Atlantic MNPS
operation is also required when flying trans-polar.
A typical polar flight starting in the United States will maintain routine
VHF communications with FAA ARTCCs and Canadian area control centers
until entering the Arctic region, generally the airspace north of the 70th parallel
(see Figure 11–7). Depending on atmospheric conditions, the aircraft will transition from direct VHF radio communications to HF voice communications.
This communication with ATC is conducted by an intermediary, Arctic Radio,
a commercial communications provider that handles radio traffic between
aircraft and Anchorage and Edmonton control centers. Arctic Radio provides
initial communications via VHF but eventually transitions to HF radio. At this
point, the aircraft is outside radar coverage (see Figure 11–8), and controllers
must separate the aircraft using pilot-reported position.
After crossing the pole, communications between the aircraft and Russian
ATC are maintained using HF radio. HF contact is usually maintained until
domestic VHF becomes available in central and southern Russia.

Figure 11–7. Northern and Arctic control area of Edmonton ACC.

Oceanic and International Air Trafﬁc Control

/

483

Figure 11–8. Polar route radar coverage.

Trans-polar navigation is quite different from that over the domestic
United States. While the departure and initial cruise portions of a polar flight
are routine, as the airplane nears the pole, two problems that become evident
are magnetic compass inaccuracy and meridian convergence.
Conventional magnetic compasses sense magnetic direction by detecting
the horizontal component of the Earth’s magnetic field. Since the horizontal
magnetic lines of flux become more vertical near the pole, magnetic compasses
become increasingly unreliable and unusable in an area approximately 1,000
nautical miles from each magnetic pole. The fact that magnetic North Pole
and the true North Pole are not coincident injects additional uncertainty while
navigating. Between these two “poles,” very rapid changes in magnetic variation occur over very small distances. For example, if an aircraft was directly in
between the magnetic North Pole and the true North Pole, an actual heading of
true north (aircraft flying toward the true North Pole) would be indicated on
the magnetic compass as a magnetic heading of 180°. The magnetic variation
at this point would in fact be of 180°.

484 / CHAPTER 11
An additional problem near the poles is the convergence of the meridians or lines of longitude. In conventional navigation, all the lines of longitude
converge at both the North and South poles. At either of the poles, there is only
one direction to fly, and it takes you wherever you want to go! For example, the
only direction available to an aircraft directly over the North Pole is south, and
that heading would take you just as easily to New York as it would to London
or Tokyo. This convergence of the meridians makes flying great circle routes
using magnetic or true headings virtually impossible at latitudes greater than
67° north. At these latitudes, due to the convergence of the lines of longitude,
very small changes in aircraft position, even with no actual change in heading,
can create large changes in both true and magnetic headings.
The solution to this problem is to use INS- or GNSS-derived aircraft position and use a modified grid-based form of navigation. Using the prime meridian as a reference, flying “north” from the prime meridian to the North Pole
is called “grid north” since it follows the 0 (or 360) degree line of longitude. If
a pilot wanted to fly from the North Pole to Chicago, the direction would be
“grid west” as Chicago is approximately 270° from the prime meridian traveling through Greenwich. This combination of polar grid navigation and true
headings and bearings is used until the aircraft is south of about 75° latitude,
whereby normal navigation can then resume.

KEY TERMS
Aeronautical Information
Publication (AIP)
Air Navigation Conferences
advanced technologies and
oceanic procedures (ATOPs)
controlled VFR (CVFR)
Convention on International Civil
Aviation
flight information regions (FIRs)
ICAO Annexes

International Air Transport
Association (IATA)
International Flight Information
Manual (IFIM)
International Standards and
Recommended Practices
mach
minimum navigation performance
specifications (MNPS) airspace
North Atlantic Region (NAR)

northern Pacific (NOPAC)
Oceanic Area Control Centers
(OACC)
Pacific organized track system
(PACOTS)
Procedures for Air Navigation
Services (PANS)
tracks
Transport Canada

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. What are some differences between domestic and oceanic separation standards?
2. Who grants authority for the separation of oceanic aircraft?
3. What are the requirements for operating in MNPS airspace?
4. Under what conditions can longitudinal separation be reduced within MNPS
airspace?
5. What is the purpose of the North Atlantic organized track system?

12
The Future of the National
Airspace System
Checkpoints
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Identify the problems that constrain current air trafﬁc control systems.
2. Describe the operation of the future air trafﬁc control system.
3. Describe the improvements planned for the FAA’s communications systems.
4. Describe the improvements planned for the nation’s navigation system.
5. Describe the FAA’s plan for automating air trafﬁc management.
6. Describe the function of a “conﬂict probe.”
7. Explain what is meant by “aircraft trajectory.”
8. Describe the primary components of NextGen.

486 / CHAPTER 12
The U.S. air traffic control system has developed in spurts over the last
50 years. Intervals of relative calm have been repeatedly interrupted by periods
of major change and system improvement. Most of these improvements have
been made in response to changes in public opinion that resulted from major
aircraft accidents or incidents and that forced the FAA and its predecessor, the
CAA, to develop a series of air traffic control system research and development
plans. The SC-31 and the Project Beacon task force reports were among the
more well-known plans.
The current ATC system was developed over time to meet system users’
needs with modern technology, and it has worked remarkably well. What it
lacked, however, was long-term, goal-oriented ATC research and development
programs. Instead of trying to predict the future and then developing a system
designed specifically for the future, the FAA and the CAA were usually trying to
catch up with improved technology. This has not entirely been the FAA’s fault;
in most instances, the appropriation and procurement process and unforeseeable changes in the aviation industry—such as deregulation, the PATCO strike,
and hub-and-spoke airline systems—have been responsible.
As the 1970s came to a close, the FAA found itself unprepared for major
changes in the industry that would dramatically affect the air traffic control
system. Major hardware components had reached their operational capacity
and were becoming increasingly antiquated and obsolete. The computer system installed in the ARTCCs was routinely reaching capacity and was increasingly prone to failures and breakdowns. Many terminal controllers were using
outdated equipment that was increasingly expensive to operate and maintain.
Some of this equipment was so old that the data plates still bore the insignia of
the CAA—an agency that had been replaced 25 years earlier.

Automated Air Trafﬁc Control
Air traffic is forecast to grow at a rate of over 10 percent per year over the next
decade. As a result, the primary objective of the FAA is to introduce automation
and improved reliability into the ATC system.
If the FAA continues to separate traffic as it does now, a significant number of new controllers will need to be hired and trained. In theory, this growing demand might be met by hiring additional controllers and managers, but
this approach would be prohibitively expensive and would not improve the
system’s overall efficiency. As the ATC system operates now, every controller is
responsible for separating aircraft within a certain block of airspace. Using current technology and procedures, each controller can separate a finite number
of aircraft. Employing additional controllers might permit the FAA to reduce
the size of every sector, thereby reducing the load on each controller, but system
capacity would be only marginally increased, and the amount of coordination
necessary to operate the system would increase monumentally. Whereas the
ATC system of the 1950s was drowning in paperwork, the FAA system of the
twenty-first century would smother in coordination.

The Future of the National Airspace System

/

487

The FAA’s proposed solution is to increase every controller’s productivity, thereby increasing the number of aircraft that can be separated. The FAA
believes that by using sophisticated computer hardware and software, every
controller can become less involved in the mechanics of separating aircraft
and can become more of a traffic manager or monitor. The computer system
envisioned by the FAA would help the controller determine whether potential
aircraft conflicts exist and would even be able to automatically propose alternative resolutions to the controller.
Procedural
Separation
Standards

The Current System In the current air traffic control system, the pilot determines the flight’s objectives and decides how those objectives can best be met.
These objectives include the destination airport, route of flight, proposed altitude, cruising airspeed, time of departure, climb and descent profiles, and speed
schedules. The flight plan, however, conveys only a limited number of these
objectives to the controller; parameters such as speed scheduling and climb and
descent profiles are not transmitted.
The controller can query the pilot about these parameters or can make
gross determinations of the aircraft’s flight profile by interpreting the flight track
and altitude information displayed on the radar scope. Using this limited information, the controller is responsible for separating participating aircraft. The
task is further complicated by procedural restrictions that may cause rerouting
of aircraft using preselected routes or altitudes. In addition, at any time during
the flight the pilot may request a change in altitude or route or both. Then, the
controller must predict the consequences of the request and ensure that both
aircraft and procedural separation are maintained.
Although the current ATC system attempts to satisfy each pilot’s request
for a specific route or altitude, procedural restrictions are used to ensure positive aircraft separation and an efficient, orderly flow of traffic. As the number of aircraft participating in the ATC system increases, however, additional
route and altitude restrictions must be instituted to reduce the potential conflict
between converging streams of traffic. In reality, the imposition of these procedural restrictions separates potential, not real, traffic; thus, aircraft may often
be denied the use of “empty airspace.” Ironically, this may be the very airspace
that the pilot had originally requested but was not cleared to use because of
an ATC-imposed procedural restriction. The routine use of these restrictions
results in increased fuel use, increased flight times, loss of flexibility, and, occasionally, reduced traffic flow.
Great care must also be taken not to overload the controller with the task
of separating these aircraft. Procedural restrictions are commonly used to separate areas of traffic flow from each other, but they are seldom necessary for the
actual separation of aircraft. The routine imposition of procedural restrictions
reduces the controller’s workload, thereby decreasing the potential for a loss of
separation. Up to a point, the use of procedural separation actually increases
the amount of traffic that can be separated by each controller because he or
she is not required to constantly predict the flight track of each aircraft (and
every ensuing potential conflict). Unfortunately, this system also requires that

488 / CHAPTER 12
every aircraft remain within the procedurally prescribed routes and altitudes.
Once these routes become saturated, no additional aircraft can be accepted by
the controller, even if sufficient airspace exists elsewhere.
Procedural restrictions tend to keep aircraft at inefficient altitudes or
result in circuitous routes. These procedures are prearranged among ATC facilities to ensure that potentially conflicting traffic flows are always separated,
either laterally or vertically, allowing for a small range of individual deviations
and eliminating the need to coordinate individual clearances with nearby sectors or facilities. Since the limiting factor that leads to the imposition of these
procedural restrictions is the controller’s capacity to coordinate clearances and
predict separation conflicts, and not airspace saturation, an automated process would greatly reduce the need for rigid procedural restrictions on system
capacity.
ATC Modernization

The capacity of today’s National Airspace System (NAS) is constrained by rules,
procedures, and technologies that require pilots and air traffic controllers to
conduct operations within narrow, often inefficient, guidelines. As air traffic
continues to grow, system inefficiencies and their associated costs are compounded. Due to the constraints in today’s ATC system, users cannot reduce
their operational costs by flying preferred routes or by receiving timely departure/arrival slots. The current ATC system does not permit pilots to choose
either routes or altitudes on any real-time basis. Most traffic management programs “manage” aircraft by delaying or rerouting them. This system of traffic
management wastes fuel and increases the time that aircraft are in flight, thereby
artificially clogging up the system. Although this air traffic control system provides a high level of safety, it was not designed to handle the volume of traffic
already present or the approximately 10 percent per year increase predicted for
the next century.
In response to these limitations, the FAA and the aviation industry are
working together on two major interdependent air traffic control initiatives—
free flight and ATC modernization. According to the FAA, free flight is defined
as “a concept for safe and efficient flight operating capability under instrument
flight rules (IFR) in which the operators have the freedom to select their path
and speed in real time. Air traffic restrictions are imposed only to ensure separation, to preclude exceeding airport capacity, to prevent unauthorized flight
through special use airspace (SUA), and to ensure the safety of flight. Restrictions are limited in extent and duration to correct the identified problem. Any
activity that removes restrictions represents a move toward free flight.”
In theory, a free-flight ATC system would allow the pilots to choose their
own routes, altitudes, and airspeeds and modify them in real time as they see
fit. Air traffic control would only intervene if necessary to prevent the loss of
separation. This system is a far cry from today’s ATC system in which pilots
are placed on specific routes at predetermined altitudes. Much needs to be
accomplished before free flight can become a reality. In addition, the current
system needs to be maintained in some form until the transition to free flight
can be accomplished.

The Future of the National Airspace System

/

489

Current ATC Initiatives
In recent years, initiatives have been developed by the FAA to permit more
flexibility while still managing the flow of traffic. One set of programs attempts
to match traffic flow to the controller’s ability to monitor and separate traffic.
These programs are known as traffic flow management programs. The goal of
these traffic flow management projects is to increase overall system efficiency
without reducing minimum safety standards. Most recent efforts toward
increasing ATC system efficiency center on smoothing out the peaks and valleys
in traffic flows and matching these flows to theoretical maximum values. Other
initiatives are being tested that attempt to help the controller detect and solve
potential traffic conflicts. These are generically known as conflict prediction or
conflict probe programs. Both these types of initiatives must be perfected before
free flight can become a reality.
As operational experience has been gained in the ATC system over the last
few decades, the FAA, while taking into account dynamic changes in weather
and traffic flow patterns, has calculated theoretical maximum traffic values for
various components of the ATC system. These components include airways, airports, final approach routes, specific intersections, and air traffic control sectors.
Virtually all of the traffic management initiatives of the FAA attempt to dynamically match traffic demand with the theoretical maximum traffic values for these
components. The three major programs currently in use are the departure delay,
en route metering (ERM), and en route sector loading (ELOD) programs.
Departure
Delay
Program

The departure delay program involves matching actual airport demand with a
calculated airport acceptance rate (AAR). AAR is a dynamic variable that considers weather conditions, available runways, noise abatement routes, and
traffic flow patterns to determine the maximum number of aircraft that can
land at an airport during any given time period. The Air Traffic Control System
Command Center (ATCSCC), shown in Figure 12–1, in cooperation with traffic
management units (TMUs) located at every ARTCC and busy terminals, continually calculates airport acceptance rates for major airports and determines
whether predicted airport demand will exceed that value for any given time
period. If an airport overload appears likely, the ATCSCC delays selected aircraft that are still on the ground in an attempt to match future aircraft arrivals
to the airport’s predicted acceptance rate.
This program cannot be made highly automated as airport acceptance
rates can change dramatically and depend on unforeseen and unpredictable
variables, such as rapidly changing weather conditions and runway closures.
The FAA admits that the matching of demand to capacity is more of an art than
a science—computer-assisted art, but art nonetheless.

En route
Metering
Program

The departure delay program is unable to make short-term corrections to traffic
flows, since it can only affect aircraft that have not yet departed. In any case,
ATCSCC-imposed ground delays only grossly affect the actual arrival times of
aircraft. Unknown variables such as unforecast winds aloft, aircraft loading,

FAA

490 / CHAPTER 12

Figure 12–1. Air Traffic Control System Command Center located in Herndon,
Virginia.

and pilot selection of airspeed will likely change the ultimate arrival time of
each aircraft.
The en route metering program attempts to fine-tune this process in
real time. As aircraft proceed toward their destination, the air traffic control
surveillance system begins to calculate actual arrival times at the airport.
If the airport acceptance rate is predicted to be exceeded for a given time
period, the metering program calculates appropriate delays for each inbound
aircraft to effect proper spacing. The en route metering program calculates
time and distance from each aircraft to the airport and issues times for each
aircraft to cross a predetermined fix. It is left to the controller to determine
the means of delaying each aircraft. Route changes may be employed, as may
speed restrictions. The overall goal of the metering program is to ensure that
aircraft arrive at the airport in a timed sequence so that holding patterns do
not have to be used.
En route
Sector
Loading
Program

The en route sector loading (ELOD) program is a dynamic computer program
operated within each air traffic control center. ELOD constantly predicts future traffic within each sector and compares this figure with a theoretically
defined maximum traffic density for the sector. Whenever an overload is predicted, controllers determine the nature and cause of the overload, determine
whether it is a transient condition or an immediate problem, and manually
initiate aircraft rerouting or traffic metering if it is deemed necessary.

The Future of the National Airspace System

/

491

Procedural Changes
The principal philosophical change required for the transition to free flight is
a shift from the concept of air traffic control to air traffic management. ATM
differs from ATC in several ways: the increased extent of collaboration between
users and air traffic managers, greater flexibility for users to make decisions to
meet their unique operational goals, and the replacement of broad restrictions
with user-determined limits and flight restrictions only when required.
The procedural changes required for free flight correspond directly to the
change in philosophy from ATC to ATM. Under the current air traffic system,
aircraft are frequently restricted to ATC-preferred routes, which may not be
the routes preferred by the pilot or airline. Air traffic controllers direct pilots
to change their direction, speed, or altitude to avoid adverse weather or traffic
congestion. In contrast, free flight will grant pilots substantial discretion in
determining their routes. Many decisions will be collaborative, taking advantage of the best information available to the pilot and air traffic manager to
ensure safe, efficient flights.
National
Route
Program

In a preliminary move toward free flight using current technology, the FAA has
instituted the National Route Program (NRP). The NRP gives airlines and
pilots increased flexibility in choosing their routes. Under the NRP, flights are
not limited to preferred routes but may proceed direct from departure to destination (subject to route limitations within a 200-nautical-mile radius of takeoff or landing). The NRP has been expanded in phases, with each phase
lowering the base altitude included in the program. NRP operations are currently authorized at all flight levels at or above FL 290 across the contiguous
United States. Future efforts will focus on expansion of the NRP to altitudes
below FL 290.
In conjunction with the National Route Program, the FAA is trying to
increase flexibility by eliminating preferred routes whenever and wherever possible. The air traffic control system currently has close to 2,000 preferred routes.
During any given day, pilots using the low-altitude victor airway system add
approximately 125,000 miles of extra distance to their flight plans as a result
of preferred routes. Although the FAA cannot eliminate all preferred routes,
since they help ensure aircraft separation, a recent audit by the FAA indicates
that at least 100 to 150 of these routes could be eliminated without negatively
affecting system operations.

CNS Improvements
The FAA is increasingly experiencing problems with its older ATC systems,
which have exceeded their expected life cycle. The technology in many systems
is antiquated, and replacement parts are increasingly difficult to acquire. In
many cases, the FAA must hand make its own parts or cannibalize parts from

492 / CHAPTER 12
decommissioned systems to repair operational radars. Aging air traffic control
systems also experience lower reliability rates and increased maintenance cost.
This equipment is so old that many maintenance technicians are retiring before
the systems they have serviced their entire careers can be replaced.
To achieve free flight, the FAA will need to replace much of the equipment,
computers, and software currently in use in the ATC system. As part of this
process, the Radio Technical Commission for Aeronautics (RTCA) has drafted
a preliminary report describing a path to free flight. The RTCA committee
report recommended that the FAA adopt a plan that would make free flight
the mode of operation of the National Airspace System by the year 2010. The
report also specifies many of the CNS/ATM improvements that must be made
before free flight can be implemented. Some of these improvements include the
following:
• A new, all-digital communications system must be developed that will permit
the transmission of both voice and data.
• RNP-based navigation must become the navigation system standard. This
will reduce the navigational error inherent in all air traffic control separation
equations.
• Automatic dependent surveillance (ADS) will become the primary means of
transmitting aircraft positional data to ATC ground stations.
• New displays in aircraft and ATC facilities must be developed to improve pilot
and controller situation awareness.
• Computer-based decision support systems must be developed to assist or take
over some of the routine controller separation duties.

Communications System
Changes

Voice radio is the only electronic method for controller–pilot communications
that exists today. These radio communications are the essential link for controllers to provide safety or flight instructions. Given the global nature of aviation,
aircraft must be able to interface with air traffic control systems anywhere in the
world. Today’s air traffic control system is overburdened by ever-increasing levels
of air traffic and the limitations imposed by congested voice communications.
In domestic airspace, flight information is typically transmitted and
received using very high frequency (VHF) and ultra-high frequency (UHF)
voice radio. As the number of aircraft operations has grown and the demand
for communications has continued to rise, frequency congestion has become
an increasing problem. This congestion increases controller and pilot workload, creates delays, and increases the likelihood of missed or misinterpreted
information. The airspace in the immediate vicinities of Los Angeles, Chicago,
New York, and Atlanta is already out of available channels.
Communication between aircraft and ground facilities in the future will
rely less on voice radio communication and more on electronic data transmitted to and from the flight deck via data link technology. Analog radios will be
replaced by digital equipment for both voice and data.
Between now and 2015, the FAA will add digital communication capabilities through the expanded use of data link services. The term data link refers to

/

493

FAA

The Future of the National Airspace System

Figure 12–2. First CPDLC message used in air traffic control.

the overall system for entering, processing, transmitting, and displaying information. Data link technology is designed to transmit and receive air-ground
voice, alphanumeric, and graphic information.
The first operational data link system, called controller–pilot data link
communications (CPDLC), was installed and became operational at the Miami
ARTCC in 2002 (see Figure 12–2). To test this new technology, selected sectors
at Miami ARTCC are equipped to transmit messages to a group of specially
equipped airline and USAF aircraft. The new system has been used to digitally
transmit text messages from the ground to the aircraft and back. The first phase
of the CPDLC program (called Build 1) includes the capability to send four
types of messages: initial air traffic control aircraft contact, altimeter setting,
communications transfer to the next sector, and selected text messages from an
approved menu. These messages are digitally displayed on a computer screen
both at the controller workstation and in the cockpit of the selected aircraft.
After experience has been gained with the new system, and more aircraft and
sectors have been equipped, the FAA plans to enhance the capabilities of the
system to be able to transmit additional requests and information including
heading, altitude and speed assignments, pilot-initiated altitude requests, and
clearance amendments.
The Next-Generation Air/Ground Communication System (NEXCOM)
is proposed to provide air-ground communications in the future ATC system. These radios will have both digital voice and data capability and will

494 / CHAPTER 12
be designed to operate with the existing analog system. Thus, aging ground
radios can be replaced and later converted to digital operations without the
need for an intermediate radio. NEXCOM radios will use a new modulation
technique, such as time division multiple access, code division multiple access,
or carrier sense multiple access, that is software programmable. This new
radio system will be based on the VHF digital link standards defined by ICAO
and will be backward compatible with the current radio system. Information
that can be exchanged using the new system will include aircraft information, weather, traffic and approach information, and routine pilot-controller
communications.
Required
Navigation
Performance

The FAA is transitioning to a new measure of navigational accuracy known as
required navigation performance (RNP). RNP changes the national airspace
system from a ground-based, fixed navaid system to one in which aircraft operators can select which technologies they wish to use for en route and terminal
phases of flight. Aircraft operators will be able to install various independent
navigational sensors for their aircraft, choosing from VOR, VORTAC, DME,
TACAN, GNSS, LORAN, and ILS navigation systems as they see fit. In lieu of
designing airspace and airport procedures around specific navigation aids, RNP
will define the navigation performance required for aircraft to operate within
any particular airspace. RNP defines the navigation performance accuracy
(RNP level) that needs to be achieved for operation within the defined airspace
or for a particular procedure. RNP level is based on the minimum acceptable
accuracy that can be achieved at least 95 percent of the time.
As RNP-certified aircraft fly through the national airspace system, the
aircraft navigation system will automatically choose the most appropriate and
accurate set of navigation sensors to use and will continuously notify the pilot
of the accuracy of the system (using RNP level). These data will be displayed in
real time on the appropriate instruments and cockpit displays.
It is expected that RNP-capable aviation systems will require very little
pilot selection of specific navaids or systems. The various sensors installed on
the aircraft will automatically detect and use the most accurate available system within range and display this information to the pilots. This type of navigation is already commonplace in flight management systems (FMSs) found
on most modern corporate and airline aircraft. When using these systems, the
pilot is not required to physically select any particular navigation aid. The aviation suite on board the aircraft detects the most accurate available navigation
system or systems, determines the aircraft’s location, and displays the aircraft
on a moving-map indicator. Ancillary information, such as which navigation
aid is being used and the current accuracy level (RNP level), is also displayed
on the screen.
When operating on RNP-approved routes or procedures, it will become
the pilot’s responsibility to understand his or her particular aircraft’s capabilities and advise the controller if an equipment failure or other malfunction
might cause the aircraft to lose its ability to continue operating in the designated RNP airspace. If a pilot determines that a specified RNP level cannot

The Future of the National Airspace System

/

495

be achieved or maintained, it becomes his or her responsibility to advise the
controller and determine acceptable alternative routes and procedures to continue the flight.
Navigation
Security

After experiencing inadvertent jamming of GPS signals around the United
States on multiple occasions, and after conducting a formal review of the events
on and following September 11, 2001, the FAA has re-examined its transition
strategy from a ground-based to a space-based aviation navigation system.
Previously, most FAA planning documents described a transition from
the existing navigation system to one based entirely on GNSS. However, recent
events have identified problems with this strategy and required the FAA to
develop a new plan.
Occasional GPS interference was once regarded by the FAA as an accidental, somewhat improbable, and most likely localized event. It is now considered more likely to occur deliberately and over a larger geographical area for a
longer period of time. The FAA has had to focus future strategies on developing
contingency plans for deliberate and longer-term GPS disruption. The goal of
the FAA is to provide a backup system that can safely recover aircraft in the air
and sustain commercial flight operations for the length of the disruption.
In 2002, the FAA released a navigation and landing transition plan that
outlines a strategy for transitioning from the current to the future navigation
system while minimizing the potential effects of both deliberate and inadvertent jamming of future air navigation transmitters.
Previous FAA plans described the decommissioning of the ground-based
navaid system once GNSS became the primary source of navigation data. There
are currently a little more than 1,000 VOR stations in operation across the
United States. The FAA now plans to maintain a limited navigation system
of about 470 strategically placed VORs. By relocating existing VORs to more
optimal locations, the FAA will develop a system of uninterrupted navigational
coverage for all aircraft operating at altitudes of 5,000 feet MSL and above. In
addition, all existing DMEs and TACAN stations would remain operational.
DME can provide very accurate inputs into flight management systems, while
TACANs are necessary for military homeland defense.
There are currently over 1,200 ILS installations at airports across the
United States. As GPS-based procedures become commonplace, total ILS installations will be reduced with the proviso that at least one system always remain
as a basic backup at every airport currently equipped with ILS. To provide allweather capability, the approximately 100 Category II and III ILS installations
currently installed would remain operational.
The FAA is currently conducting an extensive review to consider whether
the LORAN-C network, which is currently operating but scheduled for decommissioning, can be upgraded and used as a backup for the GPS system. With some
modification, LORAN could most likely be used to provide acceptable en route
and nonprecision instrument approach capability to most airports. LORAN still
has many limitations, however, that make it unable to act as a complete and reliable backup for the GPS system. Technical studies and modification still must

496 / CHAPTER 12
be conducted to determine whether LORAN-C can become the sole backup
system for GPS.
Surveillance
Systems

Knowing the position and intended path of aircraft relative to others is necessary
to ensure safe separation. The accuracy and certainty with which aircraft positions
can be tracked determine the procedures and spacing used in ATC. Improved
aircraft surveillance can improve the overall efficiency of the nation’s airspace by
reducing separation requirements. To reduce separation standards while still providing free flight requires the ability to accurately and reliably locate and track
aircraft with greater precision and a faster update rate than is used today.
Separation methods employed today include visual positioning confirmation, radar positioning, and pilot position reports transmitted via voice
radio. Visual separation is common in both general aviation and commercial
air transport operations, though its use is limited to clear weather conditions.
Radar permits air traffic controllers to monitor aircraft movements and more
easily apply separation criteria. If radar is not available, pilot position reports
are used.
Surveillance coverage and accuracy will be enhanced in the future by
incorporating GNSS-derived positioning information with information provided by radar and/or pilot reports. This information can be translated into 4-D
(position plus time) and made available to both pilots and controllers.
A new system, known as automatic dependent surveillance (ADS), has
been developed to both augment and eventually replace ground-based surveillance radar systems. Unlike radar, which tracks aircraft using interrogating
radio signals, ADS is based on aircraft-derived positioning and transmits reports
based on onboard navigational instruments (most likely GNSS). ADS relies on
data link technologies to transmit this information. There are two forms of
ADS: ADS-Address (ADS-A) and ADS-Broadcast (ADS-B). The ADS-A system
exchanges information between a specific aircraft and ATC on request. The
ADS-B system broadcasts information periodically to all aircraft in the immediate vicinity and all air traffic management facilities within a specified area.
The primary objective of ADS-A and ADS-B technology is to improve
surveillance coverage, particularly in areas having poor or no radar coverage.
When ADS-equipped aircraft are within radar coverage, their positions will be
verified by radar reports, providing independent and redundant surveillance. In
areas not covered by radar, ADS will provide the controllers with “radarlike”
computer displays of aircraft location. This will permit separation requirements
in areas with inadequate or nonexistent radar coverage to be reduced.
The FAA currently plans to use surveillance radars to provide independent
airspace coverage for the next decade. Once ADS becomes commonplace and
reliable, surveillance radars may be decommissioned. Until that time, radar will
still be the primary form of aircraft surveillance. The focus of the FAA in this
area is to upgrade the existing radar system to distribute radar data in a way that
will enable the FAA to increase its effective airspace coverage using fewer radars.
Obsolete radar systems will be replaced with newer digital systems. The information provided by these systems can be transmitted to multiple computer sites,

/

497

FAA

The Future of the National Airspace System

Figure 12–3. ASR-11 digital airport surveillance radar.

with the data redistributed throughout the ATC system. Each ATC facility will no
longer be required to be tied into a single radar site. Radar data can be distributed
systemwide, even to facilities that do not have current radar capability.
To provide en route surveillance capability, all of the older ARSR-1 and
-2 radars will be decommissioned and replaced, if necessary, by digitally
enhanced ARSR-3 or newly acquired ARSR-4. In the terminal environment,
older, analog ASR-7 systems will be replaced with the new digital output
ASR-11 radars (see Figure 12–3). Many of the existing ASR-8 radars will be
given an upgrade that includes digital output, turning them into ASR-8Ds. The
most recent addition to air traffic control, the all-digital ASR-9 radars, will be
installed at the larger airports.

Air Trafﬁc Management
Manual air traffic control procedures need to be augmented with
computer-based decision support systems if the ATC system is to become
more efficient and capable. Current FAA hardware and software systems are

498 / CHAPTER 12
generally incompatible with one another, and implementing any standardized
system throughout the FAA is next to impossible. Before any widespread decision support systems can be installed, the FAA must upgrade and standardize
the hardware used in the air traffic control system. Only after this is accomplished can uniform and effective software be developed to assist controllers in
their air traffic management tasks.
Hardware

Air traffic controllers currently use a combination of procedures and automated systems to separate traffic. The decision support systems in use today
provide only limited assistance to air traffic controllers. Most routine decisions
are made based on the training, experience, and judgment of the individual
controllers, who must follow a set of narrowly defined air traffic procedures.
As the volume of air traffic increases and as procedures allow greater pilot
discretion, the efficient management and monitoring of air traffic will require
the use of more advanced decision support systems.
The previously described programs ensure the efficient and effective collection, transfer, and display of information. Decision support systems need to
be designed to improve the effectiveness of tasks such as flight planning, traffic
sequencing, conflict checking, and conflict resolution. These new systems will
enable controllers to simultaneously provide greater flexibility, reduce delays
in congested airspace, and enhance overall safety. These systems will need new
computer hardware and software installed at every major air traffic control
facility. The FAA currently plans to replace outdated air traffic control computers at all the ARTCCs and approximately 225 FAA and Department of
Denfense radar approach control sites across the country.
The current automation systems available through either the ARTSs
located at approach controls or the host computer at the ARTCCs have
exceeded their expected life cycle. Numerous hardware components are no
longer commercially available, and the antiquated software is expensive to
maintain. The current system capacity cannot be economically expanded to
meet projected traffic levels, because the hardware architecture has reached
its limits. The hardware and software architecture will also delay introducing
some new functional enhancements designed to reduce controller workload,
improve safety, and increase throughput capacity at major airports.

Next
Generation
Air Traffic
Control
(NextGen)

Next Generation Air Traffic Control (NextGen) is the FAA designation for a
program that will transform ATC from a system of air traffic control to one of
air traffic management. This transition is important if the national airspace
system is going to be able to meet increasing user demand. NextGen is a set of
concepts that, when implemented, will permit increasing numbers of aircraft to
fly closer together on more direct routes, thereby increasing airspace efficiency
and reducing delays.
In today’s air traffic control system, aircraft separation is maintained by
air traffic controllers who use radar screens to visualize aircraft flight paths,
make subjective judgments as to future aircraft positions and potential conflicts, and mentally develop alternate flight paths. Controllers then transmit any

The Future of the National Airspace System

/

499

required flight path changes via voice radio. Variations in aircraft and navigation performance capabilities are rarely taken into account as a single set of
equipment-based separation procedures and standards for all aircraft are used.
Although many of today’s modern aircraft are capable of flying more precise
flight paths in both space and time, current flight plans are primarily based on a
series of charted airspace points with limited in-flight flexibility in real time.
Major
Components
of NextGen

Some of the major components of the NextGen air traffic project are as follows:
• Trajectory-based operations
• Collaborative air traffic management
• Negotiated routes
• Improved aircraft separation
• Additional ADS functions
• En route automation modernization

TrajectoryBased
Operations

The basis for flight operations under NextGen depends on the development of
what is known as trajectory-based operations (TBO). A trajectory can be
roughly defined as the four-dimensional flight path of an aircraft through space
and time. The concept of TBO is to shift the FAA from operating a clearancebased method of air traffic control to a trajectory-based system of air traffic
management. Aircraft operating in the system will be assigned flexible, negotiated trajectories while ATC morphs from a system of individual aircraft control
to one of airspace and traffic flow management. The function of controllers
will change from that of a tactical decision maker to one of becoming a strategic traffic flow coordinator. Controllers will manage aircraft trajectories by
evaluating overall flows and supervising the adjustment of individual trajectories ensuring aircraft safety and separation. A system of flexible management
of aircraft trajectories will permit maximum utilization of available airspace,
providing increased access to the ATC system for all users, while providing
advantages to those aircraft with advanced navigational capabilities.
While operating in the NextGen environment, aircraft will be required to
transmit and receive aircraft and navigational data that include precise aircraft
route information and the time to cross specific fixes. New surveillance equipment and improved aircraft avionics capabilities will provide controllers and
pilots accurate position and trajectory data for each and every aircraft. Aircraft
properly equipped might be authorized to perform some delegated separation
previously the purview of the air traffic controller. Advanced automation systems will provide the controller with the tools necessary to manage aircraft
operating in the system, regardless of their individual capabilities. Automated
conflict probes will be available to constantly monitor changing aircraft trajectories, recognize potential conflicts well in advance, and provide resolution
advisories to the controller and pilots. ATC system tools will enable controllers
to accommodate more pilot requests for trajectory changes by providing conflict detection and resolution in a timely manner.

500 / CHAPTER 12
Controllers will be able to use point in space metering to provide safe
and orderly traffic flows, increasing the efficient use of airspace. Point in space
metering will permit controllers to ensure accurate aircraft location over any
fix, boundary, or random point in space in real time. Decision support tools
will be developed and implemented that will permit controllers to issue scheduled arrival times over an infinite number of locations. Point in space metering
will also permit controllers to accurately issue clearances to aircraft in all four
dimensions.
Flexible
Airspace
Management

In the current ATC system, airspace configurations and sector boundaries are
fairly inflexible and are based on historical flows and limitations. This inflexibility imposes a capacity constraint on the system during periods of peak
demand, airspace restrictions, and weather-related traffic re routings. It is not
currently possible to reconfigure in real-time airspace due to changing conditions (such as a runway change at a large airport). Generally, the physical size
and dimensions of different air traffic control areas, such as TRACON and
center boundaries as well as any internal sectors, are relatively inflexible.
NextGen will enable the ATC system to be flexible enough so that sector
boundaries and airspace definitions can be changed in real time to accommodate changes in air traffic flows.
The use of RNP as a navigational standard will enable both pilots and
controllers to more efficiently describe and separate aircraft trajectories. The
current system of airways and routes very often creates artificial areas of traffic
congestion. Busy airports are also constrained by arrival and departure procedures and airspace design based more on navaid and airspace restrictions than
the need to separate aircraft. Increased use of RNP will permit the flexibility of
point-to-point operations and allow for the development of routes, procedures,
and approaches that are more efficient and free from the constraints and inefficiencies of ground-based navaids.
High-density arrival and departure corridors to the nation’s busiest airports will be developed to provide a more efficient transition to and from
en route airspace. New arrival procedures that use RNP will be employed at
busier airports allowing for closer route spacing than is available today. Equivalent visual approach procedures will be developed that remove restrictions
currently imposed during periods of inclement weather. Precision approaches
should become available to every runway thereby increasing overall airport
throughput. RNP-based metering of aircraft both into and out of the terminal
environment will provide more efficient use of high-density airspace. Effective
use of 4-D metering of aircraft will provide a more efficient use of terminal
airspace and airport runways.

Collaborative
Air Traffic
Management

Collaborative air traffic management (CATM) is an attempt to accommodate
aircraft operator preferences to the maximum extent possible with restrictions
imposed only when an actual operational need exists. The concept of CATM is
to adjust airspace and air traffic control systems to meet real-time aircraft
demand, rather than constraining demand to match system capabilities. If

The Future of the National Airspace System

/

501

restrictions are still required, the goal of collaborative management is to give the
aircraft operator the opportunity to resolve them in a more effective way for
their operation rather than the FAA arbitrarily defining “punitive” restrictions.
CATM presupposes that all airspace operators are able to work together
and collaborate on air traffic management decisions. CATM presupposes a
common, inclusive exchange of information to all stakeholders in the air traffic
management system so that they can collaborate on tactical objectives. Within
the CATM environment, aircraft operators will have access to a full range of
flight planning tools, all the data the FAA has access to including real-time
aircraft position and ATC system load, and can then optimize their own flight
plans based on their own internal corporate needs. Figures 12–4, 12–5, and
12–6 show some of the CATM tools currently available to aircraft operators.
The first implementation of CATM, known as Collaborative Decision
Making or CDM program, is currently operating and was established by the
FAA in an effort to improve traffic flow management by establishing closer
collaboration between the FAA and system users.

Image not available due to copyright restrictions

FAA

502 / CHAPTER 12

Figure 12–5. Traffic flow in and out of Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport.

All aircraft currently flying under IFR flight plans in U.S. airspace are currently tracked by ATC computer systems at the ARTCCs. These data are electronically transmitted to the ATCSCC in Washington, D.C., and are then correlated
and verified by the ATCSCC computers. Flights essential to national security or
law enforcement are typically removed from the system, and then the data are
made available to others in the aviation community. Using this information, the
FAA and system users can determine actual and projected traffic flows at major
airports, monitor flight progress, and make strategic scheduling decisions.
The data are currently available to the traffic management units located at
every ARTCC and most large TRACONs. Many airlines use these data also. The
information is now available to interested systems users through private information vendors. These vendors take the raw data provided by the FAA and present
the data to users using customized software. Using this information, individuals
can visualize traffic flow into and out of airports, predict landings and departures,
and even track specific flights. Individual corporations, such as Dimensions International and Lockheed-Martin, have developed software that permits groups of
users to use these data. Large corporations, or even individuals, can gain access to
the flight information needed to manage their aviation operations.

/

503

FAA

The Future of the National Airspace System

Figure 12–6. Graph of aircraft inbound to and departing from Dallas/Fort Worth
International Airport.

As the ATC system becomes increasingly congested, these collaborative
programs will become more important to system users. Systems such as these
may help eliminate or reduce the scope and duration of ground delays and
allow ATC users more flexibility in responding to airport arrival constraints.
By using these and other software programs to establish accurate pictures of
real-time schedule information, system users will be better able to determine
actual and projected traffic flow demands at major airports.
Negotiated
Routes

By integrating the aircraft’s avionics with a high speed data link, aircraft can
request and be assigned dynamic flight routes in four dimensions. These 4-D
routes are called negotiated routes. ATC can issue and pilots can request any
4-D route that has specific performance requirements. Pilots will be able to
define their requested trajectory, beginning with their taxiing out at the departure, all the way through the en route, arrival, landing and taxi in stages of
flight. Air traffic control can define constraints in all four dimensions along the
entire trajectory to ensure aircraft separation. Aircraft performance boundaries

504 / CHAPTER 12
in the vertical dimension as well as time-along-path dimensions can be defined
similar to how RNP defines the lateral dimension of flight. A full 4-D trajectory
can include time constraints and crossing requirements, altitude and/or airspeed limitations as well as typical navigational requirements. For any aircraft
unable to maintain their trajectory within the specified performance requirements, pilots must then renegotiate a new trajectory with ATC.
Improved
Aircraft
Separation

Implementation of trajectory-based operations will reduce the dependence of
air traffic controllers on surveillance radar. Aircraft separation will be achieved
by strategic separation of trajectories, rather than tactical separation through
surveillance or aircraft position and altitude. Aircraft will automatically be
issued 4-D clearances that can be precisely complied with and will ensure tactical separation. Surveillance, through either ADS or radar, will continue to play
an important role in monitoring compliance to assigned trajectories, detecting
blunders, as well as handling the problem of unexpected failure of either airborne or ground-based electronic system.
As confidence in the system increases, it will become possible to let the
pilots be responsible for their own separation. In some cases such as parallel
approaches and certain crossing and passing traffic situations, the NextGen
system might include a transfer of separation responsibility to the flight crew,
similar to how flight in VFR conditions are handled today. The three categories
of pilot assisted separation under consideration include aircraft-assisted spacing, aircraft separation, and aircraft delegated separation.
In aircraft-assisted spacing, an aircraft’s trajectory is defined in terms relative to another aircraft, rather than in absolute terms. In other words, the pilots
might be issued a clearance that requires them to maintain a specified distance
or time from another aircraft. The overall airspace separation responsibility for
all aircraft remains with the controller, but the specified separation between the
two selected aircraft could become the responsibility of one pilot.
Aircraft separation involves a limited delegation of separation responsibility to an aircraft for a short period of flight. A good example might be during
closely spaced parallel approaches where the pilots might be made responsible
for maintaining a certain minimum distance from a number of nearby aircraft
also on the approach. Aircraft delegated separation is defined as a flight regime
wherein the flight crew assumes total responsibility for separation from all
other traffic. This mode of separation might be used when aircraft activities
are confined to a certain, specified block of airspace. Before any of this can be
accomplished, a more precise and reliable positioning system, as well as the
ability to automatically, quickly and accurately broadcast and receive critical
flight information, needs to be developed.

Additional
ADS
Functions

ADS is a form of surveillance in which aircraft provide, via a data link, flight data
derived from onboard navigational and flight control systems. Avionics onboard
the aircraft determines its position in four dimensions (longitude, latitude, altitude, and time), processes this position information along with other aircraftderived flight parameters, and transmits the information openly to other users.
Any airborne or ground-based ADS receiver may receive and use this ADS

The Future of the National Airspace System

/

505

transmission as needed. With ADS-B, controllers see radar-like displays that
update in real time and don’t have the surveillance limitations of ground-based
radar. ADS-B-equipped aircraft can display the position and altitude of other
nearby ADS-B-equipped aircraft using integrated cockpit display equipment.
Traffic information services or TIS-B provides ADS-B-equipped aircraft
with an enhanced display of all nearby aircraft. Using ADS capabilities, nonADS-B aircraft are not displayed on the cockpit display. TIS-B uplinks aircraft position data as detected by ground-based surveillance radars to aircraft
equipped with ADS-B. This aircraft information is merged with that received
directly from other aircraft ADS transmissions and is displayed on the aircraft’s
multifunction display. TIS-B serves as a complement to ADS-B by sending traffic information for those aircraft that are not yet equipped with ADS-B.
Flight information services or FIS-B provides capability to broadcast noncontrol, advisory information directly from a ground station to the aircraft via
ADS frequencies and equipment. FIS-B transmissions might include graphical
and textual weather reports and forecasts, airspace information, notices to airmen, and/or other aeronautical information in real time.
ADS-C is short for Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Contract. The
operating concept of ADS-C is that the ground-based ATC system can electronically demand a reporting contract with any aircraft without pilot intervention. Upon request of the ground station, the ADS system on the aircraft
will automatically provide information obtained from its own onboard sensors, (such as position, speed, rate of climb/descent, altitude, etc.) and pass this
information along to the ground station. ATC might need to set up a contract
with the airplane to automatically send a position report on a specified periodic basis to more accurately monitor the aircraft’s position. The controller or
ground computer system could also set up a contract with the airborne system
that would require the airplane to send a positional message if certain flight
path deviations, such as from a specific altitude or route of flight, occurred.
Contracts under ADS-C are automatically coordinated between ATC and the
aircraft system itself. This greatly reduces the amount of voice communications
needed between pilots and controllers and ensures a more accurate and timely
transmission of information. ADS-C also has an emergency function whereby
the pilots, through the simple push of a button, can send all relevant aircraft
information to a controller in the case of an airborne emergency.
En route
Automation
Modernization

The host and oceanic computer system currently operating at the ARTCCs is
inadequate for the planned software enhancements that will be needed for
NextGen. The FAA has begun the installation of the en route automation modernization (ERAM) computer system to replace existing air traffic control automation systems used at the centers.
ERAM will replace both the host computer system software and hardware
and the direct-access radar channel backup system. ERAM will be designed to
provide a system that will be both modular and expandable. Based on commercial off the shelf hardware and custom software, ERAM will integrate with
existing radar sensors and display equipment, but will be designed with new
surveillance and flight data processing capabilities, be able to provide enhanced

506 / CHAPTER 12
traffic flow management metering and sequencing, and will be easily adaptable to any ARTCC site. The ERAM system will also provide integrated monitoring and control capabilities, data recording and playback, data reduction
and analysis systems, and new development tools and utilities. It is planned
that ERAM will provide the ARTCC controller with increased automation
availability and reliability, thereby reducing delays, minimizing traffic restrictions, and improving NAS efficiency. Once ERAM becomes operational at the
ARTCCs, the software being developed by the FAA to enhance the ATC system
for NextGen should be easily installed.
ERAM will receive digital surveillance aircraft positioning reports from
external sensors such as radar and ADS. The surveillance data processor will
provide automatic tracking, conflict alert, and minimum safe altitude warning.
The flight data processor subsystem will replace the current FDP system and
will be responsible for exchanging and processing flight planning information
between and within facilities. The flight data processor will also compute a
four-dimensional trajectory for every aircraft and make it available to air traffic
management decision support systems and other advanced planning applications. The flight data processor will establish the association between tracks and
flight plans for formatting and sending appropriate information for display.
Once ERAM has been installed, new decision support software can be
installed, tested, and used by air traffic controllers. ERAM certification at the
first ARTCCs is scheduled for 2009 to 2010 with full implementation nationwide by 2012.

KEY TERMS
ADS-Contract (ADS-C)
aircraft situation display
airport acceptance rate (AAR)
automatic dependent surveillance
(ADS)
Collaborative Decision Making
(CDM)
Collaborative Air Traffic
Management (CATM)
conflict probe

controller–pilot data link
communications (CPDLC)
data link
departure delay program
en route automation
modernization (ERAM)
en route metering program
(ERM)
en route sector loading program
(ELOD)

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. What improvements are planned to the ATC system?
2. How will these changes affect pilots and controllers?
3. What changes will be made to the management of the ATC system?
4. What changes will be made to the aviation navigation system?

equivalent visual approach
Flight Information Services (FIS-B)
free flight
negotiated routes
Next Generation Air Traffic
Control (NextGen)
point in space metering
Traffic Information Services (TIS-B)
trajectory-based operations
(TBO)

13
The Federal Aviation Administration
Checkpoints
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Identify the relationship of the FAA to other federal agencies.
2. Describe the general structure of the FAA and where air trafﬁc control ﬁts into
that structure.
3. Describe the regional structure of the FAA.
4. Describe the process of becoming a controller for the FAA.
5. Identify the various screening programs applied to prospective air trafﬁc
controllers.
6. Describe the FAA controller training process.

508 / CHAPTER 13
The FAA is a diverse branch of the federal government that can trace its
roots back 50 years to the Bureau of Air Commerce. The predecessors of the
FAA have been parts of larger organizations (such as the Commerce Department) as well as completely separate divisions of the government (the Federal
Aviation Agency). Since 1967, however, the Federal Aviation Administration
has been the largest part of a cabinet-level agency, the Department of Transportation (DOT). The FAA administrator reports directly to the secretary of
transportation, as do the heads of the Federal Highway Administration, the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, the Federal Railroad Administration, the Urban Mass Transportation Administration, the Coast Guard,
and the St. Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation. Major policy changes
in aviation are either approved or initiated by the secretary of transportation,
who is the official transportation spokesperson for the executive branch of
the U.S. government. All FAA funding requests are submitted to the Office of
the Secretary of Transportation (OST), which then makes an official budget
request to the president.

Administrative Structure
The FAA is the federal agency responsible for the safety of civil aviation operations in the United States. This is accomplished through the issuance and
enforcement of regulations and standards that cover the manufacture, operation, and maintenance of aircraft. The FAA also certifies pilots, mechanics, and
other safety-related air carrier employees. The FAA has been designated by
Congress as the agency responsible for promoting and regulating commercial
space transportation and for developing programs to study and mitigate some
of the adverse environmental effects of civil aviation.
FAA
Operations

The FAA is responsible for operating the national airspace system, which
includes air navigation and air traffic control used by both civilian and military
aircraft. As part of this process, the FAA coordinates and operates a network
of navigation aids, control towers, air route traffic control centers, and flight
service stations. The FAA also develops specific air traffic rules and controls air
traffic and airspace.

FAA
Organization

The FAA is headed by the Administrator and Deputy Administrator, both
selected by the President and approved by the Senate. Various assistant and
associate administrators report to the Administrator and are in charge of specific offices that have been created according to the FAA’s functions. Administrative functions are distributed across the country through various regional
and local offices as well as two major centers.

Administrative The FAA’s various missions have been administratively divided into several
principal lines of business, administered from the Washington headquarters of
Structure
the FAA, the Technical Center in Atlantic City, the Aeronautical Center in

The Federal Aviation Administration

/

509

Figure 13–1. FAA structure.

510 / CHAPTER 13
Oklahoma City, nine regional offices, and hundreds of operational facilities
located across the country.
The actual working structure of the FAA has been modified by almost
every Administrator. The description of the FAA structure contained in this
chapter was accurate as of 2009, but due to technological and political change
in the country and in the aviation industry, the structure of the FAA will most
likely change again in the near future (see Figure 13–1).
Administrator
and Deputy
Administrator

The Administrator, assisted by a Deputy Administrator, is responsible for all the
functions of the FAA and for providing leadership to the over 40,000 FAA
employees. The FAA Administrator is located in Washington, D.C., is selected
to serve a 5-year term, and historically has been an FAA outsider. The Administrator’s position is not a career position but a politically appointed office. The
Administrator is usually a person with a high level of aviation knowledge and
an extensive aviation background. To ensure civilian control of aviation, the
Federal Aviation Act of 1958 requires that the FAA Administrator be a civilian.
Therefore, military aviators interested in this position are required to resign
their commissions before they can be appointed Administrator.
There are other FAA officers located in Washington who report directly
to the Administrator. The Chief of Staff is employed as an advisor to the
Administrator and the Deputy Administrator in the management of the FAA.
The Chief Financial Officer oversees the FAA’s operating budget as well as
the various accounting and financial management systems. The Chief Counsel
provides legal services to the FAA Administrator and all subordinate FAA
organizations. Attorneys from this office may be asked to legally represent the
FAA in front of a variety of organizations including the National Transportation Safety Board, Merit Systems Protection Board and the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, as well as in legal disputes adjudicated in the U.S.
court system.

Associate
Administrators

Associate Administrators are charged with managing specific operations within
the FAA. These individuals report directly to the FAA Administrator and are
usually FAA employees who have worked their way up within the FAA or
comparable outside agencies or companies.
The Associate Administrator for Airports office is charged with planning
and developing the national airport system. This includes responsibility for
programs related to airport safety and inspections, as well as developing airport
design, construction, and operation standards. This office is also responsible
for national airport and environmental planning.
The office of the Associate Administrator for Commercial Space Transportation has been charged by Congress to ensure the protection of the public
while also encouraging and facilitating U.S. commercial space transportation.
This office is responsible for approving all private space transportation, (nonNASA or DOD), designs, and operating regulations. It is also responsible for
conducting required certifications and inspections as they relate to private
space travel in the United States.

The Federal Aviation Administration

/

511

The Associate Administrator for Aviation Safety office is responsible for
enforcing safety standards for all aspects of the civil aviation industry in the
United States. This office coordinates thousands of FAA employees and designees located at FAA headquarters and regional and field offices. This office
is responsible for the certification, production approval, and airworthiness of
aircraft. They are also responsible for the certification of pilots, maintenance
technicians, dispatchers, controllers, and other safety-related occupations.
There are also a number of Assistant Administrators whose role is to monitor and manage specific areas of concern to the FAA. The Assistant Administrator
for Civil Rights has been designated as the principal advisor to the Administrator
concerning civil rights, equal employment opportunity, and diversity matters.
The Assistant Administrator for Aviation Policy Planning & Environment develops the FAA’s legislative proposals and activities. The Assistant Administrator for
Human Resource Management assists in managing FAA human resources plans,
programs, and initiatives. The Assistant Administrator for Information Services and Chief Information Officer manages the FAA’s information technology
infrastructure. The Assistant Administrator for Communications is responsible
for public affairs and official FAA communications. The office of the Assistant
Administrator for International Aviation is responsible for coordinating FAA’s
international activities around the world. The Security and Hazardous Materials
office is responsible for FAA personnel security, security of facilities, investigations, security of classified materials, and emergency operations planning. This
office is also responsible for formulating and enforcing the rules governing the air
transportation of hazardous materials. The Assistant Administrator for Regions
and Center Operations office oversees operations in the FAA’s regions as well as
the Aeronautical Center located in Oklahoma City.
FAA Regional
Offices

When the FAA was formed in 1958, most of the important policy decisions
were made and implemented by the Washington headquarters staff, with little
regional input. FAA facilities in the field were often left to implement these staff
decisions. This lack of input to the decision-making process prevented the FAA
from developing and implementing programs that could be tailored to regional
and local needs.
In 1961, as an attempt to return responsibility for implementing FAA
policies to those individuals who had more direct contact with the flying public, FAA Administrator Najeeb Halaby began to shift many of the day-to-day
operations away from Washington, D.C., to the FAA regional headquarters.
His plan was to use Washington to develop a national policy and standards
and let the regional administrators decide how to best implement those policies. In Halaby’s judgment, decentralization promised increased flexibility and
efficiency and would provide better service to the aviation public by increasing
local input into FAA decisions while reducing decision-making time.
The FAA still operates as a decentralized agency much like that which
existed when Halaby retired from the FAA Administrator’s position in 1965.
Although the number and locations of the regional offices have changed since
that time, they are still responsible for carrying out most of the FAA’s policies.

512 / CHAPTER 13

Seattle

New England
Boston

Great
Lakes
Northwest
Mountain

Eastern
Central

Western
Pacific

New York

Chicago

Kansas City

Los Angeles
Southwest

Atlanta
Southern

Fort Worth

Anchorage
FAA Regions
Alaska
FAA

Hawaii

Figure 13–2. FAA regional boundaries and regional office locations.

There are currently nine FAA regional offices (ROs) across the country (see
Figure 13–2) with one additional office located in Belgium (see Table 13–1).
Every FAA facility in the field is assigned to one of these regional offices.
Each region has regional directors, assistant directors, and departments that
roughly correspond to those at the FAA headquarters. Within these regions
are a variety of smaller FAA offices with individualized responsibilities applicable to aviation operations with their local area of jurisdiction. These offices
include Aircraft Certification Offices (ACO), Airport Regional Offices (ARO),
Flight Standards District Offices (FSDO), Manufacturing & Inspection District
Offices (MIDO), Aircraft Evaluation Groups (AEG), International Field Offices
and Units (IFO/IFU), and Certificate Management Offices (CMO).
The FAA also operates two specialized centers. The Mike Monroney Aeronautical Center, located in Oklahoma City, houses the FAA Academy, Center
for Management and Executive Leadership, and the FAA Logistics Center. The
FAA’s William J. Hughes Technical Center is a research, development, test, and
evaluation facility operated by the FAA located in Atlantic City, New Jersey.
Air Traffic
Organization

The Air Traffic Organization (ATO) was created as the operations arm of the
FAA by executive order of President Bill Clinton in December 2000. It was
an attempt to change the method by which the FAA had delivered air traffic

The Federal Aviation Administration
Table 13–1.

/

513

FAA Regional Ofﬁces
Region

Area Served

Location

Alaskan

Alaska

Anchorage, Alaska

Central

Iowa
Kansas
Missouri
Nebraska

Kansas City, Missouri

Eastern

Delaware
Maryland
New Jersey
New York
Pennsylvania
Virginia
Washington, D.C.
West Virginia

New York, New York

Great Lakes

Illinois
Indiana
Michigan
Minnesota
North Dakota
Ohio
South Dakota
Wisconsin

Chicago, Illinois

New England

Connecticut
Maine
Massachusetts
New Hampshire
Rhode Island
Vermont

Boston, Massachusetts

Northwest Mountain

Colorado
Idaho
Montana
Oregon
Utah
Washington
Wyoming

Seattle, Washington

Southern

Alabama
Florida
Georgia
Kentucky
Mississippi
North Carolina
South Carolina
Tennessee

Atlanta, Georgia

(continued)

514 / CHAPTER 13
Table 13–1.

(Continued)
Region

Area Served

Location

Southwest

Arkansas
Louisiana
New Mexico
Oklahoma
Texas

Fort Worth, Texas

Western Pacific

Arizona
California
Hawaii
Nevada

Los Angeles, California

Europe, Africa, and the Middle East

Brussels, Belgium

control services since its inception. It was to be structured more like a commercial, performance-based organization (PBO) than a typical governmental
bureaucracy. The ATO concept was approved by Congress and went into effect
in 2003. Russell Chew, a former American Airlines pilot and system operations
manager, was hired as the first ATO Chief Operating Officer (COO).
The ATO is organized around four business units, each led by a senior
vice president. It is headed by the COO who reports directly to the FAA Administrator. The COO is responsible for all aspects of the operation of the U.S.
air traffic control system. This includes operation and maintenance, financial
performance, research, and acquisition. The ATO employs close to 75 percent
of the total FAA workforce.
The primary task of the ATO is to provide a safe and efficient air traffic
control system. The administrative structure of the ATO currently consists of
eight vice presidents, four senior vice presidents, and the Chief Operating Officer. Most air traffic control functions reside in four service units located within
the ATO. These service units include System Operations, Technical Operations,
En Route and Oceanic, and Terminal Services.
System Operations is responsible for establishing policies, standards, and
procedures that involve air traffic flow, airspace, and aeronautical information management. System Operations also interfaces with the Department of
Defense (DOD) and the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) regarding
air transportation security issues. Technical Operations Services is responsible
for the maintenance and operation of the technical and electronic equipment
used by air traffic controllers. En Route and Oceanic Services are where the
majority of air traffic controllers work. These controllers are assigned to the
ARTCCs where they manage aircraft flying at high altitudes over the domestic
United States as well as within international airspace delegated to the FAA. The
rest of the controllers work for the Terminal Services business unit that is in
charge of the TRACONs and control towers spread across the United States.

The Federal Aviation Administration

/

515

Getting Hired by the FAA
A potential controller must complete a number of steps and pass several tests
before he or she can be considered for employment by the FAA. Many applicants begin the process of becoming an FAA controller, but relatively few can
pass all the tests and the training required to become fully certified as an FAA
controller.
Controller
Hiring
Sources

The FAA has three categories of controller hiring sources: certified controllers,
approved college program graduates, and the general public.

Certified
Controllers

Individuals who have either prior FAA or Department of Defense air traffic
control experience include veterans with military air traffic control experience,
retired military controllers, or civilian air traffic controllers not currently working for the FAA. Previous controllers who wish to apply to the FAA must show
that they have, at a minimum, 52 consecutive weeks of air traffic control experience in a military or civilian air traffic control facility. Applicants must show
that they possess the knowledge, skills, and ability to perform air traffic controller duties as well as a comprehensive knowledge of air traffic control laws,
rules, and regulations. Applicants from the group are highly sought by the FAA
as they may require little academic training and certify as controllers in a fairly
short time.

Approved
College
Programs

Individuals have successfully completed an approved air traffic control related
program of study if it is from a school approved under the FAA’s Collegiate
Training Initiative (CTI) program.
The FAA has partnerships with many 2- and 4-year aviation programs to
teach basic course material in air traffic control. Graduates from approved CTI
schools must achieve a passing score on the Air Traffic Selection and Training
(AT-SAT) examination offered by the FAA. The AT-SAT tests for characteristics needed to perform the duties of an air traffic controller including numeric
ability, prioritization, planning, tolerance for high-intensity work, decisiveness,
visualization, problem solving, and movement detection.
CTI graduates are given hiring priority by the FAA and are eligible to
bypass the first 5 weeks of qualification training at the FAA Academy in Oklahoma City. The academy training program for CTI students consists of optionspecific (terminal or en route) initial training. These students must successfully
complete all required training at the FAA Academy and are then sent to field
facilities for additional on the job training. The following 2- and 4-year colleges
are currently approved by the FAA under the CTI program to offer air traffic
control programs.
Aims Community College, Greeley, CO
Arizona State University, Mesa, AZ

516 / CHAPTER 13
Broward College, Pembroke Pines, FL
Community College of Baltimore County, Baltimore, MD
Community College of Beaver County, Beaver Falls, PA
Daniel Webster College, Nashua, NH
Dowling College, Shirley, NY
Eastern New Mexico University, Roswell, NM
Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University, Daytona Beach, FL and Prescott, AZ
Florida Community College at Jacksonville, Jacksonville, FL
Green River Community College, Auburn, WA
Hampton University, Hampton, VA
InterAmerican University of Puerto Rico, San Juan, PR
Jacksonville University, Jacksonville, FL
Kent State University, Kent, OH
LeTourneau University, Longview, TX
Lewis University, Romeoville, IL
Metropolitan State College of Denver, Denver, CO
Miami Dade College, Miami, FL
Middle Georgia College, Cochran, GA
Middle Tennessee State University, Murfreesboro, TN
Minneapolis Community and Technical College, Eden Prairie, MN
Mount San Antonio College, Walnut, CA
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN
St. Cloud State University, St. Cloud, MN
Tulsa Community College, Tulsa, OK
University of Alaska, Anchorage, AK
University of North Dakota, Grand Forks, ND
University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK
Vaughn College of Aeronautics and Technology, Flushing, NY

General public applications are also accepted by the FAA. To be hired
as an air traffic controller, applicants from the general public must achieve a
qualifying score on the Air Traffic Selection and Training (AT-SAT) examination. Applicants must also show that they have at least 3 years of progressively
responsible work experience and/or the completion of a 4-year course of study
leading to a bachelor’s degree, or an equivalent combination of work experience and college credits. If successfully hired, general public applicants complete the entire 15-week academy training program and are then sent to field
facilities for additional on the job training.
In addition to the above listed employment paths, every applicant for an air
traffic control position must be a U.S. citizen and be able to speak English clearly
enough to be understood over radios, intercoms, and similar communications
equipment. Applicants cannot be over the age of 30 when hired. Applicants

The Federal Aviation Administration

/

517

must also pass medical and psychological exams, an extensive security background investigation, and an interview.
Medical
Examination

Applicants who pass the AT-SAT and do well in the interview are then scheduled for a medical exam. This examination includes a physical and eye exam,
blood chemistry tests, an audiogram, a psychological test, and a drug screening.
The physical examination is similar to the second-class medical exam required
of commercial pilots. Controllers are required to maintain their physical health
throughout their career, verified by regular medical exams.
Some of the medical requirements required for employment with the FAA
include the following:
Vision—Must have distant and near vision of 20/20 or better in each eye
separately, without correction, or have lenses that correct distant and near
vision to 20/20, each eye separately. Applicants must also have normal color
vision.
Hearing Standards—No hearing loss in either ear of more than 25 db at 500, 1,000
and 2,000 Hz and no more than a 20-db loss in the better ear by audiometer,
using ANSI (1969) standards.
Cardiovascular Standards—No medical history of any form of heart disease. A
history of high blood pressure requiring medication requires special review.
Neurological Standards—No medical history or clinical diagnosis of a convulsive
disorder, or a disturbance of consciousness, without satisfactory medical
explanation of the cause, and must not be under any treatment, including
preventive, for any condition of the nervous system.
Psychiatric Standard—No medical history or clinical diagnosis of psychosis or
other severe mental disorders.
Diabetes—A medical history or diagnosis of diabetes mellitus is not automatically
disqualifying but will require special review by the FAA.
Substance Abuse/Dependency—A history of substance abuse/dependency, including
alcohol, narcotic, non-narcotic drugs, and other substances, will be extensively
investigated by the FAA.
Psychological Exam—Individuals must take and pass a psychological exam.
General Medical—All other medical conditions will be evaluated on an individual
basis. All applicants’ medical histories and current examinations will be
carefully reviewed. This includes past medical records and, if applicable, a
review of military medical records.

Every applicant for employment as an air traffic controller is required
to provide a urine sample during the medical exam that is screened for illegal
drugs. The presence of drugs disqualifies an applicant for employment with
the FAA.
Security
Investigation

Upon successful completion of the medical examination, the FAA will conduct
a detailed security investigation of the applicant. This investigation includes an
extensive civil and criminal background check, enquiries to former employers

518 / CHAPTER 13
and educational institutions, and a review of any appropriate FBI, military, and
police files. Some of the items included in the security investigation are military
discharge history, any possible government loyalty issues, dishonesty in an
application or examination process, any drug-related felony and/or firearms or
explosives offenses, a history of alcohol-related incidents, willful disregard of
financial obligations, derogatory employment terminations, or any other pattern or combination of incidents that lead to questions about applicant behavior and intent.
FAA applications are conducted online using the FAA Web site at www.faa.gov.
Applicants must meet the listed job-specific requirements and can only apply
during the limited time frame that the job posting is made available. Individuals
can apply under more than one category if they qualify.

FAA
Academy
Training

On successful completion of the above steps, the applicant may be hired as a
conditional employee of the FAA. Every newly hired FAA controller is required
to successfully complete the controller training program conducted at the FAA
Academy in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma (see Figure 13–3). The program is
designed to evaluate both the academic and practical skills of the controller.

FAA

Application
Process

Figure 13–3. The Aeronautical Center Headquarters building in Oklahoma City.

The Federal Aviation Administration

/

519

The training program at the FAA Academy is based on the concept of
“train for success.” The aforementioned screening program is designed to
ensure that every student selected for training at the academy has demonstrated
the skills necessary to become an air traffic controller.
The training at the academy focuses on the basic knowledge and skills
required of an air traffic controller. Students learn about different aircraft types
and operations and about the administrative and operational structure of the FAA.
Air traffic control rules, regulations, and operational procedures are stressed.
Practical experience through simulation is gained in control tower operation and nonradar and radar separation. Students use computer-based training
systems and computer-controlled control tower and radar simulators as an
integral part of this unique training program.
The academy training program is approximately 15 weeks in length and is
composed of three parts: aviation academics, part-task training, and skills building. Conditional employees who have previous air traffic control experience,
such as ex-military controllers, may be permitted to skip either the first or the
first and second portions of the academy training program (see Figure 13–4).
At the conclusion of the academy training program, each student completes a series of performance verification exams. On successful completion of
these exams, the controller is placed at an appropriate facility.
Field Training
Program

Having completed the academy training program, the developmental controller
is sent to an air traffic control facility. Depending on the complexity of the
facility, it may take 1 to 4 years to become fully certified as an air traffic controller. Developmental controllers typically begin training on an operating position
such as flight data. After certifying on this position, they begin to train on the
other positions at the facility. At a control tower, the training sequence is usually
flight data, clearance delivery, ground control, local control, and the radar control positions. Center controllers begin at flight data and progress through radar
associate/nonradar controller before certifying as a radar controller.
Prior to receiving radar training at the facility, developmental controllers
are sent to the Radar Training Facility (RTF) at the FAA Academy in Oklahoma
City (see Figure 13–5). Once they have completed this training and are certified
on every position at the facility, they must complete a facility rating exam. After
passing this exam, they are considered facility-rated or full performance level
(FPL) controllers.

Salaries
A controller’s salary is based on the type and complexity of the facility to
which he or she is assigned. ATC facilities are assigned classifications of ATC-5
though ATC-12, with ATC-12 being the most complex. Employees of more
complex facilities receive correspondingly higher salaries. Upon completion of
the FAA Academy training program, controllers are sent to their first field facility for on the job training. As controllers progress through training and meet

FAA

520 / CHAPTER 13

Figure 13–4. ATC hiring paths.

facility-specific requirements, their pay grade is raised, step by step, from their
developmental salary to the pay level assigned to the facility.
Once controllers reach full performance level status at their facility, their
pay will move up within the range specified for that facility. If a controller
transfers to another facility, he or she typically retains the same salary, so long
as it is still within the range of pay specified for the new facility.

/

521

FAA

The Federal Aviation Administration

Figure 13–5. The Radar Training Facility at the FAA Academy in Oklahoma City.

Controller base pay is predicated on a normal 5-day work week. Because
most FAA facilities are open 24 hours a day, controllers receive additional
pay for working outside the hours that most employees consider normal. If a
controller works a night shift, he or she will receive additional pay, known as
night differential. Controllers also receive additional pay for working holidays
and weekends. Controllers who work overtime are paid an overtime rate that
is equal to one and a half times their regular hourly rate. If they train other
controllers or act in a supervisory role during a portion of or their entire shift,
they are eligible for various levels of differential pay. Controllers working
in areas with higher costs of living may also be eligible for additional salary
compensation. As a general rule, based on these various salary differentials,
most controllers can expect to make 10 to 35 percent more than the base salary in any given year. Table 13–2 lists the pay ranges assigned to the different
ATC pay levels. Table 13–3 lists selected ATC facilities and their pay level
classification.

522 / CHAPTER 13
Table 13–2.

ATC Facility Pay Bands
ATC Grade

Table 13–3.

Minimum and Maximum Salary

5

$39,400–$53,075

6

$47,425–$61,100

7

$48,100–$66,575

8

$56,125–$74,600

9

$58,500–$82,675

10

$66,525–$90,700

11

$71,500–$102,775

12

$79,525–$110,800

Locality Pay Adjustments
Local Area

Pay Adjustment

Atlanta

18.55%

Boston

23.98%

Buffalo

16.39%

Chicago

24.47%

Cincinnati

18.28%

Cleveland

18.16%

Columbus

16.62%

Dallas

19.95%

Dayton

15.9%

Denver

22.03%

Detroit

23.56%

Hartford

25.08%

Houston

28.28%

Huntsville

15.46%

Indianapolis

14.23%

Los Angeles

26.51%

Miami

20.21%

Milwaukee

17.65%

Minneapolis

20.36%

New York

27.96%

Philadelphia

21.25%

Phoenix

16.08%

The Federal Aviation Administration
Table 13–3.

Locality Pay

/

523

(Continued)
Pittsburgh

15.86%

Portland

19.71%

Raleigh

17.38%

Richmond

16.10%

Sacramento

21.53%

San Diego

23.44%

San Francisco

34.35%

Seattle

21.06%

Washington

23.10%

Rest of United States

13.86%

Due to differences in costs of living, a locality pay adjustment is made to all
controllers’ salaries. The specific adjustments, as of 2009, are included in
Table 13–3.

ATC Facility Classifications
FAA Air
Traffic
Control
Facilities

The FAA operates over 300 air traffic control facilities in the United States.
There are basically eight different types of ATC facilities. More than one type
of facility may be co-located in the same building.
Tower without Radar The Tower without Radar is an airport traffic control
facility that provides airport air traffic control service using visual means only.
These facilities are located at airports where the principal users are primarily
low-performance aircraft operating VFR. These are commonly called “VFR
towers”. Most of these facilities are now operated under contract to the FAA.
Terminal Radar Approach Control The Terminal Radar Approach Control
is an air traffic control facility that provides radar control service to aircraft
arriving or departing the primary airport and adjacent airports and to aircraft
transiting the facility’s airspace. Controllers in a stand-alone facility TRACON
do not work in a control tower.
Combination Radar Approach Control and Tower with Radar The Combination Radar Approach Control and Tower with Radar is an air traffic control
facility that provides radar control services to aircraft arriving or departing
the primary airport and adjacent airports and to aircraft transiting the facility’s airspace, but it also has a tower to control traffic landing and departing

524 / CHAPTER 13
at the primary airport. This facility would be operationally divided into two
functional areas: radar approach control and tower. These two functional areas
might be located within the same facility or in close proximity to one another,
and controllers assigned to this facility would be certified and commonly work
in both areas.
Combination Nonradar Approach Control and Tower without Radar This
is an air traffic control facility that provides air traffic control services for the
airport at which the tower is located and, without the use of radar, provides
approach and departure control services to aircraft operating under IFR to and
from one or more adjacent airports. There are very few of these facilities left in
the domestic United States. Typically, the approach control function of a facility
like this would be delegated to a nearby TRACON, and the tower would then
become a VFR tower.
Combined Control Facility (CERAP) CERAP is an air traffic control facility
that provides approach control services for one or more airports as well as en
route air traffic control for a large area of airspace. Some may provide tower
services along with approach control and en route services. This is an uncommon facility found primarily in remote or off-shore areas.
Control Tower with Radar The Control Tower with Radar is an airport traffic control facility that provides traffic advisories, spacing, sequencing, and
separation services to VFR and IFR aircraft operating within the vicinity of the
airport using a combination of radar and direct observations.
Air Route Traffic Control Center The Air Route Traffic Control Center is
an air traffic control facility that provides air traffic control service to aircraft
operating on IFR flight plans within controlled airspace and principally during
the en route phase of flight.
Combined TRACON Facility The Combined TRACON Facility is an air traffic control facility that provides radar approach control services for two or
more large hub airports, as well as other satellite airports. This facility is large
enough that most controllers do not certify in all the operating positions.
Table 13–4 lists most of the FAA facilities located in the United States, their
internal FAA identification, the staffing level, and pay grade of the facility.
Federal
Contract Air
Traffic
Control
Services

In 1982, Congress authorized the FAA to initiate a pilot program to contract
out air traffic control services for five VFR towers that were closed as a result
of the controllers’ strike. Since that time, the contract tower program has been
expanded to include additional FAA-operated VFR towers and to include towers at airports that never had an FAA-operated tower.
Contract controllers providing air traffic control services in towers in the
contract tower program must meet the same controller certification requirements as FAA controllers and are certified by the FAA. There are currently over

The Federal Aviation Administration
Table 13–4.

/

525

FAA Facility Information

FAA ID

Facility Name

Facility Type

ZAB

Albuquerque ARTCC

ARTCC

Staffing Level

ATC Grade

185–227

10

ZAN

Anchorage ARTCC

ARTCC

79–97

10

ZAU

Chicago ARTCC (Aurora, IL)

ARTCC

312–382

12

ZBW

Boston ARTCC (Nashua, NH)

ARTCC

208–254

11

ZDC

Washington ARTCC (Leesburg, VA)

ARTCC

276–338

12

ZDV

Denver ARTCC (Longmont, CO)

ARTCC

243–297

10

ZFW

Fort Worth ARTCC

ARTCC

222–272

12

ZHU

Houston ARTCC

ARTCC

246–300

11

ZID

Indianapolis ARTCC

ARTCC

315–385

12

ZJX

Jacksonville ARTCC (Hilliard, FL)

ARTCC

274–334

11

ZKC

Kansas City ARTCC (Olathe, KS)

ARTCC

228–278

11

ZLA

Los Angeles ARTCC (Palmdale, CA)

ARTCC

242–296

11

ZLC

Salt Lake ARTCC

ARTCC

140–172

10

ZMA

Miami ARTCC

ARTCC

207–253

11

ZME

Memphis ARTCC

ARTCC

246–300

12

ZMP

Minneapolis ARTCC (Farmington, MN)

ARTCC

203–248

11

ZNY

New York ARTCC (Ronkonkoma, NY)

ARTCC

226–276

12

ZOA

Oakland ARTCC (Fremont, CA)

ARTCC

211–257

11

ZOB

Cleveland ARTCC (Oberlin, OH)

ARTCC

312–382

12

ZSE

Seattle ARTCC (Auburn, WA)

ARTCC

130–158

10

ZTL

Atlanta ARTCC (Hampton, GA)

ARTCC

288–352

12

ABE

Allentown-Lehigh Valley International

ATCT

23–28

8

ABI

Abilene Regional

ATCT

20–24

7

ABQ

Albuquerque International Sunport

ATCT

33–41

9

ACK

Nantucket Memorial

ATCT

10–12

7

ACT

Waco Regional

ATCT

14–17

6

ACY

Atlantic City International

ATCT

23–28

8

ADS

Addison

ATCT

11–13

6

ADW

Andrews AFB

ATCT

10–12

6

AFW

Fort Worth Alliance

ATCT

10–12

5

AGC

Allegheny County

ATCT

10–12

5

AGS

Augusta Regional Bush Field

ATCT

13–15

6

ALB

Albany International

ATCT

22–26

8

ALO

Waterloo Municipal

ATCT

10–12

5

AMA

Amarillo International

ATCT

15–19

7

ANC

Anchorage International

ATCT

23–28

8
(continued)

526 / CHAPTER 13
Table 13–4.

(Continued)

FAA ID

Facility Name

Facility Type

Staffing Level

ATC Grade

APA

Denver Centennial

ATCT

16–20

8

APC
ARB

Napa County

ATCT

7–9

5

Ann Arbor Municipal

ATCT

6–8

5

ARR

Aurora Municipal

ATCT

7–9

5

ASE

Aspen Pitkin County

ATCT

11–13

5

ATL

Hartsfield Atlanta International

ATCT

42–52

12

AUS

Austin-Bergstrom International

ATCT

37–45

9

AVL

Asheville Regional

ATCT

15–19

6

AVP

Wilkes-Barre-Scranton International

ATCT

20–24

7

AZO

Kalamazoo-Battle Creek

ATCT

16–20

7

BDL

Bradley International

ATCT

12–14

7

BED

Bedford-Hanscom

ATCT

10–12

7

BFI

Boeing Field-King County International

ATCT

16–20

8

BFL

Bakersfield-Meadows Field

ATCT

16–20

7

BGM

Binghamton Regional Link Field

ATCT

11–13

5

BGR

Bangor International

ATCT

16–20

6

BHM

Birmingham International

ATCT

28–34

8

BIL

Billings Logan International

ATCT

15–19

7

BIS

Bismarck Municipal

ATCT

10–12

5

BJC

Jefferson County

ATCT

10–12

6

BNA

Nashville International

ATCT

40–48

9

BOI

Boise Air Terminal

ATCT

23–28

8

BOS

Boston Logan International

ATCT

28–34

10

BPT

Jefferson County-Southeast Texas Regional

ATCT

10–12

6

BTR

Baton Rouge Metropolitan, Ryan Field

ATCT

19–23

7

BTV

Burlington International

ATCT

17–21

7

BUF

Buffalo Niagara International

ATCT

24–30

8

BUR

Burbank-Glendale-Pasadena

ATCT

14–17

7

BWI

Baltimore Washington International

ATCT

23–28

9

CAE

Columbia Metropolitan

ATCT

21–25

7

CAK

Akron Canton Regional

ATCT

22–26

8

CCR

Concord-Buchanan Field

ATCT

7–9

6

CDW

Caldwell-Essex County

ATCT

8–10

5

CHA

Chattanooga-Lovell Field

ATCT

17–21

7

CHS

Charleston AFB-International

ATCT

21–25

8

CID

Cedar Rapids-Eastern Iowa

ATCT

14–18

6

The Federal Aviation Administration
Table 13–4.

/

527

(Continued)

FAA ID

Facility Name

Facility Type

Staffing Level

ATC Grade

CKB

Clarksburg Regional

ATCT

12–14

6

CLE
CLT

Cleveland Hopkins International

ATCT

50–62

10

Charlotte-Douglas International

ATCT

68–84

12

CMA

Camarillo

ATCT

8–10

6

CMH

Port Columbus International

ATCT

38–46

9

CMI

University of Illinois-Willard

ATCT

18–22

7

CNO

Chino

ATCT

9–11

7

COS

City of Colorado Springs Municipal

ATCT

24–30

8

CPR

Casper-Natrona County International

ATCT

9–11

5

CPS

St. Louis Downtown

ATCT

8–10

6

CRP

Corpus Christi International

ATCT

39–47

9

CRQ

Calsbad-Mc Clellan-Palomar

ATCT

10–12

7

CRW

Charleston-Yeager

ATCT

16–20

7

CSG

Columbus Metropolitan

ATCT

5–7

4

CVG

Cincinnati-Northern Kentucky International ATCT

59–77

11

DAB

Daytona Beach International

ATCT

53–65

9

DAL

Dallas Love Field

ATCT

19–23

8

DAY

Cox Dayton International

ATCT

33–41

8

DCA

Ronald Reagan Washington National

ATCT

21–25

10

DEN

Denver International

ATCT

31–37

11

DFW

Dallas/Fort Worth International

ATCT

44–54

12

DLH

Duluth International

ATCT

14–17

6

DPA

DuPage

ATCT

10–12

5

DSM

Des Moines International

ATCT

23–29

7

DTW

Detroit Metropolitan Wayne County

ATCT

28–34

11

DVT

Phoenix Deer Valley

ATCT

15–19

8

DWH

Houston-Hooks

ATCT

12–14

7

ELM

Elmira-Corning Regional

ATCT

12–14

5

ELP

El Paso International

ATCT

21–25

7

EMT

El Monte

ATCT

8–10

5

ERI

Erie International

ATCT

13–15

6

EUG

Eugene-Mahlon Sweet Field

ATCT

18–22

7

EVV

Evansville Regional

ATCT

17–21

7

EWR

Newark Liberty International

ATCT

30–36

10

FAI

Fairbanks International

ATCT

18–22

7

FAR

Fargo-Hector International

ATCT

14–17

6
(continued)

528 / CHAPTER 13
Table 13–4.

(Continued)

FAA ID

Facility Name

Facility Type

Staffing Level

ATC Grade

FAT

Fresno Yosemite International

ATCT

23–29

8

FAY
FCM

Fayetteville Regional

ATCT

20–24

7

Flying Cloud

ATCT

9–11

6

FFZ

Mesa-Falcon Field

ATCT

12–14

7

FLL

Fort Lauderdale-Hollywood International

ATCT

22–26

9

FLO

Florence Regional

ATCT

12–14

6

FNT

Flint Bishop International

ATCT

17–21

7

FPR

Fort Pierce-St Lucie

ATCT

9–11

6

FRG

Republic

ATCT

11–13

7

FSD

Sioux Falls-Joe Foss Field

ATCT

14–18

6

FSM

Fort Smith Regional

ATCT

26–32

8

FTW

Fort Worth Meacham International

ATCT

11–13

5

FWA

Fort Wayne International

ATCT

19–23

7

FXE

Fort Lauderdale Executive

ATCT

13–15

7

GCN

Grand Canyon National Park

ATCT

7–9

5

GEG

Spokane International

ATCT

23–28

8

GFK

Grand Forks International

ATCT

13–15

7

GGG

East Texas Regional-Gregg County

ATCT

16–20

7

GPT

Gulfport Biloxi International

ATCT

14–18

7

GRB

Green Bay-Austin Straubel International

ATCT

20–24

7

GRR

Grand Rapids-Gerald Ford International

ATCT

18–22

8

GSO

Piedmont Triad International

ATCT

25–31

8

GSP

Greenville-Spartanburg International

ATCT

16–20

7

GTF

Great Falls International

ATCT

12–14

5

HEF

Manassas Regional

ATCT

9–11

5

HIO

Portland Hillsboro

ATCT

10–12

7

HLN

Helena Regional

ATCT

8–10

6

HOU

William P. Hobby

ATCT

17–21

8

HPN

Westchester County

ATCT

13–15

7

HSV

Huntsville International

ATCT

17–21

7

HTS

Huntington Tri-State

ATCT

14–17

6

HUF

Terre Haute-Hulman Field

ATCT

14–18

6

HWD

Hayward Executive

ATCT

8–10

6

IAD

Washington Dulles International

ATCT

29–35

11

IAH

George Bush Inter Continental

ATCT

34–42

12

ICT

Wichita Mid-Continent

ATCT

32–39

9

The Federal Aviation Administration
Table 13–4.

/

529

(Continued)

FAA ID

Facility Name

Facility Type

Staffing Level

ATC Grade

ILG

New Castle County

ATCT

9–11

6

ILM
IND

Wilmington International

ATCT

14–18

6

Indianapolis International

ATCT

42–52

9

ISP

Long Island Macarthur

ATCT

11–13

7

ITO

Hilo International

ATCT

10–12

7

JAN

Jackson International

ATCT

16–20

7

JAX

Jacksonville International

ATCT

44–54

9

JFK

John F. Kennedy International

ATCT

29–35

10

JNU

Juneau International

ATCT

8–10

5

LAF

Lafayette-Purdue University

ATCT

9–11

4

LAN

Lansing-Capital City

ATCT

20–24

8

LAS

Las Vegas-McCarran International

ATCT

35–43

11

LAX

Los Angeles International

ATCT

39–47

11

LBB

Lubbock International

ATCT

18–22

7

LCH

Lake Charles Regional

ATCT

13–15

6

LEX

Lexington Blue Grass

ATCT

19–23

7

LFT

Lafayette Regional

ATCT

17–21

7

LGA

LaGuardia

ATCT

29–35

10

LGB

Long Beach/Daugherty Field

ATCT

18–22

8

LIT

Little Rock Adams Field

ATCT

32–39

8

LNK

Lincoln Municipal

ATCT

15–19

7

LOU

Louisville Bowman Field

ATCT

8–10

5

LVK

Livermore Muni

ATCT

8–10

6

MAF

Midland International

ATCT

22–26

8

MBS

MBS International

ATCT

14–18

6

MCI

Kansas City International

ATCT

36–44

9

MCO

Orlando International

ATCT

72–88

11

MDT

Harrisburg International

ATCT

21–25

8

MDW

Chicago Midway

ATCT

22–26

8

MEM

Memphis International

ATCT

58–70

10

MFD

Mansfield Regional

ATCT

11–13

5

MGM

Montgomery Regional-Dannelly Field

ATCT

15–19

7

MHT

Manchester

ATCT

10–12

5

MIA

Miami International

ATCT

77–95

12

MIC

Crystal

ATCT

6–8

5

MKC

Kansas City-Downtown

ATCT

10–12

5
(continued)

530 / CHAPTER 13
Table 13–4.

(Continued)

FAA ID

Facility Name

Facility Type

Staffing Level

ATC Grade

MKE

Milwaukee-Mitchell International

ATCT

38–46

9

MKG
MLI

Muskegon County

ATCT

17–21

6

Quad City International

ATCT

14–18

6

MLU
MMU

Monroe Regional

ATCT

12–14

6

Morristown Municipal

ATCT

10–12

7

MOB

Mobile Regional

ATCT

20–24

8

MRI

Merrill Field

ATCT

10–12

7

MRY

Monterey Peninsula

ATCT

7–9

5

MSN

Madison-Dane County-Truax Field

ATCT

21–25

8

MSP

Minneapolis-St. Paul International

ATCT

32–39

11

MSY

New Orleans-Louis Armstrong International ATCT

26–32

9

MWH

Grant County International

ATCT

11–13

6

MYF

San Diego-Montgomery Field

ATCT

10–12

7

MYR

Myrtle Beach International

ATCT

15–19

7

NEW

New Orleans Lakefront

ATCT

5–7

5

NMM

Meridian NAS-Mc Cain Field

ATCT

12–14

7

OAK

Metropolitan Oakland International

ATCT

22–26

8

OGG

Kahului

ATCT

10–12

7

OKC

Oklahoma City-Will Rogers World

ATCT

32–39

8

OMA

Omaha-Eppley Airfield

ATCT

12–14

6

ONT

Ontario International

ATCT

12–14

6

ORD

Chicago O’Hare International

ATCT

56–68

12

ORF

Norfolk International

ATCT

34–42

9

ORL

Orlando Executive

ATCT

10–12

6

PAE

Snohomish County-Paine Field

ATCT

8–10

6

PAO

Palo Alto

ATCT

8–10

6

PBI

Palm Beach International

ATCT

38–46

9

PDK

DeKalb Peachtree

ATCT

13–15

7

PDX

Portland International

ATCT

17–21

8

PHF

Newport News-Williamsburg International

ATCT

11–13

7

PHL

Philadelphia International

ATCT

74–90

12

PHX

Phoenix Sky Harbor International

ATCT

32–39

11

PIA

Greater Peoria Regional

ATCT

17–21

6

PIE

St. Petersburg-Clearwater International

ATCT

11–13

7

PIT

Pittsburgh International

ATCT

40–48

10

PNE

Northeast Philadelphia

ATCT

9–11

5

The Federal Aviation Administration
Table 13–4.

/

531

(Continued)

FAA ID

Facility Name

Facility Type

Staffing Level

ATC Grade

PNS

Pensacola Regional

ATCT

9–11

6

POC

La Verne-Brackett Field

POU

Poughkeepsie-Dutchess County

ATCT

7–9

6

ATCT

8–10

5

PRC
PSC

Prescott-Love Field

ATCT

12–14

7

Tri-Cities

ATCT

14–17

7

PSP
PTK

Palm Springs International

ATCT

10–12

7

Pontiac-Oakland County International

ATCT

14–18

7

PUB

Pueblo Memorial

ATCT

12–14

7

PVD

Providence-Green

ATCT

29–35

8

PWK

Palwaukee Muni

ATCT

10–12

6

PWM

Portland International Jetport

ATCT

16–20

7

RDG

Reading Regional

ATCT

13–15

7

RDU

Raleigh Durham International

ATCT

38–46

9

RFD

Greater Rockford

ATCT

19–23

7

RHV

Reid Hillview

ATCT

8–10

6

RIC

Richmond International

ATCT

11–13

6

RME

Griffiss International

ATCT

8–10

5

RNO

Reno-Tahoe International

ATCT

23–28

8

ROA

Roanoke Regional-Woodrum Field

ATCT

20–24

7

ROC

Greater Rochester International

ATCT

21–25

7

ROW

Roswell Industrial Air Center

ATCT

14–17

7

RST

Rochester International

ATCT

12–14

6

RSW

Southwest Florida International

ATCT

23–29

8

RVS

Tulsa-Richard Lloyd Jones Jr.

ATCT

14–18

8

SAN

San Diego International-Lindbergh Field

ATCT

14–18

7

SAT

San Antonio International

ATCT

48–58

10

SAV

Savannah-Hilton Head International

ATCT

22–26

8

SBA

Santa Barbara Muni

ATCT

24–30

8

SBN

South Bend Regional

ATCT

20–24

7

SCK

Stockton Metropolitan

ATCT

7–9

7

SDF

Louisville International-Standiford Field

ATCT

40–48

9

SDL

Scottsdale

ATCT

11–13

7

SEA

Seattle Tacoma International

ATCT

22–26

9

SEE

Gillespie Field

ATCT

11–13

7

SFB

Orlando-Sanford

ATCT

14–18

8

SFO

San Francisco International

ATCT

24–30

9
(continued)

532 / CHAPTER 13
Table 13–4.

(Continued)

FAA ID

Facility Name

Facility Type

Staffing Level

ATC Grade

SGF

Springfield Branson Regional

ATCT

23–29

7

SHV
SJC

Shreveport Regional

ATCT

19–23

7

San Jose International-Norman Mineta

ATCT

13–15

7

SJU
SLC

San Juan-Luis Munoz Marin International

ATCT

14–17

7

Salt Lake City International

ATCT

26–32

10

SMF

Sacramento International

ATCT

12–14

6

SMO

Santa Monica Muni

ATCT

9–11

6

SNA

John Wayne Airport-Orange County

ATCT

21–25

9

SPI

Springfield-Capital

ATCT

12–14

6

SRQ

Sarasota-Braden ton International

ATCT

10–12

6

STL

Lambert-St. Louis International

ATCT

19–23

9

STP

St. Paul Downtown Holman Field

ATCT

10–12

6

STS

Sonoma County

ATCT

7–9

5

STT

St. Thomas-Cyril King

ATCT

7–9

5

SUS

Spirit of St. Louis

ATCT

10–12

6

SUX

Sioux Gateway

ATCT

11–13

5

SYR

Syracuse Hancock International

ATCT

20–24

8

TEB

Teterboro

ATCT

17–21

7

TLH

Tallahassee Regional

ATCT

19–23

7

TMB

Kendall-Tamiami Executive

ATCT

11–13

7

TOA

Torrance-Zamperini Field

ATCT

9–11

6

TOL

Toledo Express

ATCT

18–22

7

TPA

Tampa International

ATCT

55–67

11

TRI

Tri-Cities Regional

ATCT

15–19

6

TUL

Tulsa International

ATCT

29–35

9

TUS

Tucson International

ATCT

14–18

8

TVC

Traverse City-Cherry Capital

ATCT

7–9

5

TWF

Twin Falls

ATCT

6–8

5

TYS

Knoxville-McGhee Tyson

ATCT

23–28

8

VGT

North Las Vegas

ATCT

11–13

7

VNY

Van Nuys

ATCT

18–22

8

VRB

Vero Beach Municipal

ATCT

9–11

6

YIP

Detroit-Willow Run

ATCT

9–11

5

YNG

Youngstown-Warren Regional

ATCT

18–22

7

ZSU

San Juan CERAP

CERAP

46–56

9

ZUA

Guam CERAP

CERAP

14–18

8

The Federal Aviation Administration
Table 13–4.

/

533

(Continued)

FAA ID

Facility Name

Facility Type

Staffing Level

ATC Grade

HCF

Honolulu Consolidated Facility
(ARTCC/TRACON/ATCT)

Consolidated

69–85

11

A11

Anchorage TRACON

TRACON

25–31

9

A80

Atlanta TRACON (Peachtree City, GA)

TRACON

86–105

12

A90

Boston TRACON (Merrimack, NH)

TRACON

50–62

11

C90

Chicago TRACON (Elgin, IL)

TRACON

82–100

12

D01

Denver TRACON

TRACON

53–65

11

D10

Dallas-Fort Worth TRACON

TRACON

80–98

12

D21

Detroit TRACON

TRACON

47–57

11

E10

High Desert TRACON (Edwards AFB, CA)

TRACON

18–22

8

I90

Houston TRACON

TRACON

69–85

11

K90

Cape TRACON (Falmouth, MA)

TRACON

18–22

8

L30

Las Vegas TRACON

TRACON

43–53

11

M98

Minneapolis TRACON

TRACON

47–57

11

N90

New York TRACON (Ronkonkoma, NY)

TRACON

176–215

12

NCT

Northern California TRACON (Mather, CA)

TRACON

142–174

12

P31

Pensacola TRACON

TRACON

32–39

9

P50

Phoenix TRACON

TRACON

50–61

11

P80

Portland TRACON

TRACON

27–33

9

PCT

Potomac TRACON (Warrenton, VA)

TRACON

151–185

12

R90

Omaha TRACON (Bellevue, NE)

TRACON

14–17

8

S46

Seattle TRACON (Burien, WA)

TRACON

38–46

10

S56

Salt Lake City TRACON

TRACON

38–46

10

SCT

Southern California TRACON
(San Diego, CA)

TRACON

194–237

12

T75

St. Louis TRACON (St. Charles, MO)

TRACON

41–50

10

U90

Tucson TRACON

TRACON

20–24

8

Y90

Yankee TRACON (Windsor
Locks-Hartford, CT)

TRACON

22–26

9

200 contract towers providing air traffic control services by contract controllers. Congress added a cost-sharing provision to the program in 1999. This provision allowed airports that would not typically qualify to enter the program by
paying for a portion of the tower’s operating cost. These towers do not usually
hire untrained controllers. Instead, they rely on retired FAA and/or military
controllers. The supply of these controllers is diminishing, however, and there
is concern as to how these control facilities might be staffed in the future.

534 / CHAPTER 13
There has been a history of animosity between the FAA and unions representing air traffic controllers with both making various claims as to the safety
and efficiency of the federal tower contracting system. However, in general, it
appears that the contract control towers are as safe as FAA staffed towers and
operate at about half the cost. Much of the cost savings is due to the reduced
staffing and pay for the working controllers, many of whom are receiving some
form of federal (military or FAA) retirement pay in addition to their salary.
At present, most of the low-activity VFR towers that could be contracted
out have already been, as have many control towers at military airfields. There
has been no recent organized effort by the FAA to contract out the operation
of high-activity VFR towers or any IFR-related facility such as a TRACON or
ARTCC. Table 13–5 lists the control towers across the United States currently
operated as part of the FAA contract tower program.

Table 13–5.

List of FAA Contract Towers
Bethel, Alaska
Kenai Municipal, Alaska
King Salmon, Alaska
Kodiak, Alaska
Dothan, Alabama
Brookley (Mobile), Alabama
Tuscaloosa Regional, Alabama
Fayetteville, Arkansas
Northwest Arkansas Regional, Arkansas
Rogers Municipal-Carter Field, Arkansas
Springdale, Arkansas
Texarkana Municipal/Webb Field, Arkansas
Chandler, Arizona
Flagstaff Pulliam, Arizona
Glendale, Arizona
Goodyear (Phoenix), Arizona
Laughlin/Bullhead City, Arizona
Mesa/Williams Gateway, Arizona
Ryan (Tucson), Arizona
Castle, California
Chico, California
Fullerton, California
Hawthorne, California
Mather (Sacramento), California

The Federal Aviation Administration
Table 13–5.

/

535

(Continued)
Modesto, California
Oxnard, California
Palmdale, California
Ramona Airport, California
Redding Municipal, California
Riverside, California
Sacramento Executive, California
Salinas Municipal, California
San Carlos, California
Brown Field (San Diego), California
San Luis Obispo, California
Santa Maria, California
Vandenberg Air Force Base, California
Victorville, California
Whiteman (Los Angeles), California
William J. Fox (Lancaster), California
Eagle County, Colorado
Front Range, Colorado
Grand Junction, Colorado
Bridgeport, Connecticut
Danbury, Connecticut
New London (Groton), Connecticut
Brainard (Hartford), Connecticut
Tweed-New Haven, Connecticut
Waterbury/Oxford, Connecticut
Albert Whitted (St. Petersburg), Florida
Boca Raton, Florida
Cecil Field (Jacksonville), Florida
Gainesville, Florida
Hollywood, Florida
Craig (Jacksonville), Florida
Key West, Florida
Kissimmee, Florida
Lakeland Municipal, Florida
Leesburg International, Florida
Melbourne, Florida
Naples, Florida
(continued)

536 / CHAPTER 13
Table 13–5.

(Continued)
New Smyrna Beach Municipal, Florida
Opa-Locka (Miami), Florida
Ormond Beach Municipal, Florida
Page Field, Florida
Panama City/Bay County, Florida
Pompano Beach, Florida
St. Augustine, Florida
Stuart/Witham, Florida
Titusville/Cocoa, Florida
Athens Municipal, Georgia
Fulton County, Georgia
Gwinnett County, Georgia
Macon, Georgia
McCollum, Georgia
Southwest Georgia/Albany-Dougherty, Georgia
Valdosta Regional, Georgia
Agana, Guam
Kalaeloa, Hawaii
Kona/Keahole, Hawaii
Lihue, Hawaii
Molokai, Hawaii
Dubuque, Iowa
Friedman Memorial (Hailey), Idaho
Idaho Falls, Idaho
Lewiston-Nez Perce County, Idaho
Pocatello Municipal, Idaho
Bloomington/Normal, Illinois
Decatur, Illinois
St. Louis Regional, Illinois
Southern Illinois/Carbondale, Illinois
Waukegan Regional, Illinois
Williamson County (Marion), Illinois
Bloomington, Indiana
Columbus Municipal, Indiana
Gary Regional, Indiana
Muncie/Delaware County, Indiana
Forbes Field (Topeka), Kansas

The Federal Aviation Administration
Table 13–5.

/

537

(Continued)
Garden City, Kansas
Hutchinson Municipal, Kansas
Johnson County Executive, Kansas
Philip Billard Municipal (Topeka), Kansas
Manhattan, Kansas
New Century Air Center (Olathe), Kansas
Salina Municipal, Kansas
Barkley Regional (Paducah), Kentucky
Owensboro/Daviess County, Kentucky
Acadiana Regional, Louisiana
Alexandria, Louisiana
Chennault, Louisiana
Houma, Louisiana
Shreveport Downtown, Louisiana
Barnes Municipal, Massachusetts
Beverly, Massachusetts
Hyannis, Massachusetts
Lawrence, Massachusetts
Martha’s Vineyard, Massachusetts
New Bedford, Massachusetts
Norwood, Massachusetts
Worcester, Massachusetts
Easton, Maryland
Martin State (Baltimore), Maryland
Washington County (Hagerstown), Maryland
Salisbury-Wicomico, Maryland
Battle Creek, Michigan
Detroit City, Michigan
Sawyer, Michigan
Jackson, Michigan
Anoka (Minneapolis), Minnesota
St. Cloud Regional, Minnesota
Columbia, Missouri
Jefferson City, Missouri
Joplin Regional, Missouri
Rosecrans Memorial (St. Joseph), Missouri
Saipan International, Marshall Islands
(continued)

538 / CHAPTER 13
Table 13–5.

(Continued)
Golden Triangle Regional, Mississippi
Greenville Municipal, Mississippi
Hawkins Field (Jackson), Mississippi
Meridian/Key Field, Mississippi
Olive Branch, Mississippi
Stennis International Airport, Mississippi
Tupelo Regional, Mississippi
Gallatin Field (Bozeman), Montana
Kalispell, Montana
Missoula, Montana
Concord, North Carolina
Kinston, North Carolina
New Bern, North Carolina
Smith Reynolds (Winston-Salem), North Carolina
Hickory Regional, North Carolina
Minot, North Dakota
Central Nebraska (Grand Island), Nebraska
Boire Field (Nashua), New Hampshire
Lebanon Municipal, New Hampshire
Trenton, New Jersey
Farmington Municipal, New Mexico
Lea County/Hobbs, New Mexico
Santa Fe County Municipal, New Mexico
Henderson (Las Vegas), NV
Tompkins County, New York
Niagara Falls, New York
Oneida County, New York
Stewart, New York
Bolton Field (Columbus), Ohio
Burke Lakefront (Cleveland), Ohio
Cuyahoga County (Cleveland), Ohio
Lunken Municipal (Cincinnati), Ohio
Ohio State University, Ohio
Ardmore Municipal, Oklahoma
Enid Woodring Municipal, Oklahoma
Lawton-Fort Sill Regional, Oklahoma
University of Oklahoma/Westheimer, Oklahoma

The Federal Aviation Administration
Table 13–5.

/

539

(Continued)
Stillwater, Oklahoma
Wiley Post, Oklahoma
Klamath Falls, Oregon
McNary Field (Salem), Oregon
Medford, Oregon
Pendleton, Oregon
Redmond, Oregon
Troutdale (Portland), Oregon
Capital City (Harrisburg), Pennsylvania
Lancaster, Pennsylvania
Latrobe, Pennsylvania
Williamsport/Lycoming County, Pennsylvania
Isla Grande, Puerto Rico
Rafael Hernandez Airport, Puerto Rico
Greenville Donaldson Center, South Carolina
Grand Strand/Myrtle Beach, South Carolina
Greenville Downtown, South Carolina
Hilton Head Airport, South Carolina
Rapid City Regional, South Dakota
Millington, Tennessee
Smyrna, Tennessee
McKellar-Sipes (Jackson), Tennessee
Arlington Municipal, Texas
Brownsville South Padre Island International, Texas
Denton Municipal, Texas
Easterwood, Texas
Fort Worth-Spinks, Texas
Galveston, Texas
Georgetown, Texas
Grand Prairie, Texas
Laredo International, Texas
McAllen, Texas
McKinney Municipal, Texas
Redbird, Texas
Rio Grande Valley (Harlingen), Texas
San Angelo, Texas
Stinson Municipal (San Antonio), Texas
(continued)

540 / CHAPTER 13
Table 13–5.

(Continued)
Sugar Land, Texas
Tyler, Texas
Waco TSTC, Texas
Ogden-Hinckley, Utah
Provo Municipal, Utah
Charlottesville-Albemarle, Virginia
Lynchburg, Virginia
Henry E. Rohlsen (St. Croix) Virgin Islands
Bellingham International, Washington
Felts Field (Spokane), Washington
Olympia, Washington
Renton, Washington
Tacoma Narrows, Washington
Walla Walla Regional, Washington
Yakima, Washington
Appleton, Wisconsin
Central Wisconsin, Wisconsin
Chippewa Valley, Wisconsin
Kenosha Municipal, Wisconsin
Lacrosse, Wisconsin
Rock County (Janesville), Wisconsin
Lawrence J. Timmerman (Milwaukee), Wisconsin
Waukesha County Airport, Wisconsin
Wittman Regional (Oshkosh), Wisconsin
Greenbrier Valley, West Virginia
Morgantown, West Virginia
Parkersburg, West Virginia
Wheeling Ohio County, West Virginia
Cheyenne, Wyoming
Jackson Hole, Wyoming

Flight Service
Stations

Flight Service Stations (FSSs) primarily provide preflight, in-flight, and en route
communications and weather services to private and corporate aircraft. FSSs
also coordinate search and rescue operations and provide operational support
to air shows, conventions, and other aviation events.
Flight Services Stations were previously owned and operated by the FAA.
Due to the inherent limitations of radio communications in the early twentieth
century, FSS stations were initially placed along major air routes spaced every

The Federal Aviation Administration

/

541

30 to 50 miles. As air travel grew, this eventually resulted in hundreds of stations across the country.
In 1985, the FAA embarked on a consolidation program to establish a
limited number of “super” or Automated Flight Service Stations (AFSS). These
stations were not automated in today’s sense, but instead they were equipped
with computer displays and electronic retrieval systems and advanced telephone and communications systems that permitted FSS controllers to service a
large geographic area. The FAA consolidated the FSS network and reduced the
number of facilities to about 100 in the 1980s.
In 2005, the FAA awarded a private contract for the operation and staffing of AFSSs in the continental United States, Puerto Rico, and Hawaii to the
Lockheed-Martin Corporation (Flight service stations in Alaska are still operated by the FAA). Lockheed-Martin assumed responsibility for providing flight
services at these stations beginning in October 2005. The FAA still provides
oversight, but Lockheed-Martin has the operational authority to deliver all FSS
services. Lockheed-Martin plans to deliver these services to pilots through a
new system of FSS hubs located in Virginia, Arizona, and Texas with a smaller
number of additional flight service stations spread across the United States.
This program, called Flight Service 21, will eventually provide advanced services such as a Web portal for pilots to obtain preflight briefings, file flight
plans, and obtaining graphical flight planning and weather products.
The transition to a privately operated flight service system has not been
without critics and problems. Lockheed-Martin has not met many of the metrics assigned to it by the FAA and has been assessed financial penalties. The
modernization program is behind schedule, yet it is still progressing. Numerous
groups have challenged the FAA’s decision in court on various grounds, but as
of this date the courts have upheld the legality of the contract.
Lockheed-Martin is now operating flight services under contract at fifteen
upgraded AFSS sites and three new hub sites. Lockheed-Martin constructed
three new hub FSS sites at Fort Worth, TX; Prescott, AZ; and Washington, D.C.
Lockheed-Martin also upgraded and now operates existing AFSSs in Columbia, MO; Oakland, CA; San Diego, CA; Denver, CO; St. Petersburg, FL; Miami,
FL; Macon, GA; Honolulu, HI; Kankakee, IL; Lansing, MI; Princeton, MN;
Raleigh, NC; Albuquerque, NM; Islip, NY; San Juan, PR; Nashville, TN; and
Seattle, WA.

KEY TERMS
Air Traffic Selection and Training
(AT-SAT)
aviation academics
Chief Operating Officer (COO)
Collegiate Training Initiative (CTI)
Department of Transportation
(DOT)

developmental controller
full performance level (FPL)
controller
night differential
Office of the Secretary of
Transportation (OST)
part-task training

performance verification
performance-based organization
(PBO)
Radar Training Facility (RTF)
regional offices (ROs)
skills building

542 / CHAPTER 13
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. What is the basic administrative structure of the FAA?
2. What are the responsibilities of the associate administrators?
3. What are the steps in becoming an air traffic controller?
4. How are controller salaries determined?

APPENDIX A

IFR Aeronautical Charts
Explanation of IFR En Route Terms
and Symbols
The discussions and examples in this section will be based primarily on the IFR
(Instrument Flight Rule) En route Low Altitude Charts. Other IFR products use
similar symbols in various colors. The chart legends list aeronautical symbols
with a brief description of what each symbol depicts. This section will provide
a more detailed discussion of some of the symbols and how they are used on
IFR charts.
NACO charts are prepared in accordance with specifications of the Interagency Air Cartographic Committee (IACC) and are approved by representatives of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and the Department of
Defense (DoD). Some information on these charts may only apply to military
pilots.
Airports

All active airports with hard-surfaced runways of 3000⬘ or longer are shown
on FAA IFR En route Charts. All active airports with approved instrument
approach procedures are also shown regardless of runway length or composition. Charted airports are classified according to the following criteria:

Blue – Airports with an approved Department of Defense (DoD) Low Altitude
Instrument Approach Procedure and/or DoD RADAR MINIMA
published in DoD Flight Information Publication (FLIP) or the FAA U.S.
Terminal Procedures Publication (TPP)
Green – Airports and seaplane bases with an approved Low Altitude Instrument
Approach Procedure published in the FAA TPP volumes
Brown – Airports and seaplane bases that do not have a published Instrument
Approach Procedure

Airports are plotted in their true geographic position unless the symbol
conflicts with a radio aid to navigation (navaid) at the same location. In such
cases, the airport symbol will be displaced, but the relationship between the
airport and the navaid is retained.
Airports are identified by the airport name. In the case of military airports, the abbreviated letters AFB (Air Force Base), NAS (Naval Air Station),
NAF (Naval Air Facility), MCAS (Marine Corps Air Station), AAF (Army Air
Field), and so on, appear as part of the airport name.

544 / APPENDIX A
Airports marked “Pvt” immediately following the airport name are
not for public use but otherwise meet the criteria for charting as specified
above.
Runway length is the length of the longest active runway (including displaced
thresholds but excluding overruns) and is shown to the nearest 100 feet using
70 feet as the division point; for example, a runway of 8,070⬘ is labeled 81.
The following runway compositions (materials) constitute a hard-surfaced runway: asphalt, bitumen, concrete, and tar macadam. Runways that are
not hard-surfaced have a small letter “s” following the runway length, indicating a soft surface.
LOW ALTITUDE—United States & ALASKA
Associated
City Name
Airport
Name
Airport

Part-time or established by
NOTAM. See Airport/Facility
Directory for times of
operation. In Alaska, see
Supplement Alaska
Airspace Class

Airport
Elevation
Automatic
Terminal
Information
Service

Part-time

Frequency

Longest runway length to
nearest 100 feet with 70
feet as the dividing point
(add 00)
s indicates soft surface

Lighting Capability:
Lighting available
Pilot Controlled Lighting
Part-time or on request

No lighting available
At private facilities—indicates no
lighting information available

For complete information consult the
Airport/Facility Directory
1. Airport elevation given in feet above or below mean sea level.
2. Pvt—Private use, not available to general public.
3. A solid line box enclosing the airport name indicates FAR 93
Special Requirements—see Directory/Supplement.
4. "NO SVFR" above the airport name indicates FAR 91
.
C or
Class D Airspace.
6. Airport symbol may be offset for en route navigational aids.
7. Associated city names for public airports are shown above or
preceding the airport name. If airport name and city name are
in parentheses follows the airport name. City names for military
and private airports are not shown.

An L symbol following the elevation under the airport name means that
runway lights are in operation sunset to sunrise. A L symbol indicates that
there is Pilot Controlled Lighting. A L symbol means that the lighting is part
time or on request. The pilot should consult the Airport/Facility Directory for
light operating procedures. The Aeronautical Information Manual thoroughly
explains the types and uses of airport lighting aids.
Radio Aids to
Navigation
(navaid)

All IFR radio navaid that have been flight checked and are operational are
shown on IFR en route charts. VHF/UHF navaid (VORs, TACANs, and UHF
NDBs) are shown in black, and LF/MF navaid (Compass Locators and Aeronautical or Marine NDBs) are shown in brown.
On en route charts, information about navaid is boxed as illustrated
below. To avoid duplication of data, when two or more navaid in a general

IFR Aeronautical Charts

/

545

area have the same name, the name is usually printed only once inside an
identification box with the frequencies, TACAN channel numbers, identification letters, or Morse Code identifications of the different navaid all shown in
appropriate colors.
Navaids that may be, or are, scheduled for some future corrective
action within the lifespan of the chart shall be indicated by the note “CHECK
NOTAMs.” The affected component is indicated by diagonal lines over the
frequency or channel, which indicates an abnormal status.

navaid
navaid

;
i.e.,CHECK NOTAMSA

navaid

25 nm.
.

navaid

navaid

name.

navaid.

navaid

.
—

Controlled
Airspace

—
.

Controlled airspace consists of those areas where some or all aircraft may be
subjected to air traffic control within the following airspace classifications of
A, B, C, D, and E.
Class A Airspace is depicted as open area (white) on the En route High Charts.
It consists of airspace from 18,000 MSL to FL 600.
Class B Airspace is depicted as screened blue area with a solid line
encompassing the area.

546 / APPENDIX A
Class C Airspace is depicted as screened blue area with a dashed line
encompassing the area.
Class B and Class C Airspace consist of controlled airspace extending upward
from the surface or a designated floor to specified altitudes, within which all
aircraft and pilots are subject to the operating rules and requirements specified
in the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) 71. Class B and C Airspace are
shown in abbreviated forms on En route Low Altitude Charts. A general note
adjacent to Class B airspace refers the user to the appropriate VFR Terminal
Area Chart.
Class D Airspace (airports with an operating control tower) is depicted as open
area (white) with a
following the airport name.
Class E Airspace is depicted as open area (white) on the En route Low Charts. It
consists of airspace below 18,000 MSL.

Airports within which fixed-wing special VFR flight is prohibited are
shown as:
NO SVFR

AIRPORT NAME

Air Route Traffic Control Centers (ARTCC) are established to provide
Air Traffic Control to aircraft operating on IFR flight plans within controlled
airspace, particularly during the en route phase of flight. Boundaries of the
ARTCCs are shown in their entirety using the symbol below. Center names are
shown adjacent and parallel to the boundary line.

ARTCC sector frequencies are shown in boxes outlined by the same
symbol.

Special Use
Airspace

Special use airspace confines certain flight activities or restricts entry, or cautions other aircraft operating within specific boundaries. Special use airspace
areas are depicted on aeronautical charts. Special use airspace areas are shown
in their entirety, even when they overlap, adjoin, or when an area is designated
within another area. The areas are identified by type and identifying number or
name (R-4001), effective altitudes, operating time, weather conditions (VFR/
IFR) during which the area is in operation, and voice call of the controlling
agency, on the back or front panels of the chart. Special Use Airspace with a
floor of 18,000⬘ MSL or above is not shown on the En route Low Altitude
Charts. Similarly, Special Use Airspace with a ceiling below 18,000⬘ MSL is not
shown on En route High Altitude Charts.

IFR Aeronautical Charts

/

547

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

Other
Airspace

Mode C Required Airspace (from the surface to 10,000⬘ MSL) within
30 nautical miles radius of the primary airport(s) for which a Class B airspace
is designated is depicted on En route Low Altitude Charts. Mode C is also
depicted within 10 nautical miles of all airports listed in Appendix D of FAR
91.215 and the Aeronautical Information Manual (AIM).

Mode C is required within the limits of a Class C airspace up to 10,000⬘
MSL.
Instrument
Airways

The FAA has established two fixed route systems for air navigation. The VOR
and LF/MF (low or medium frequency) system—designated from 1,200⬘ AGL
to but not including 18,000⬘ MSL—is shown on Low Altitude En route Charts,
and the Jet Route system—designated from 18,000⬘ MSL to FL 450 inclusive—is
shown on High Altitude En route Charts.

Vor LF/MF
Airway
System (Low
Altitude En
Route Charts)

In this system, VOR airways—airways based on VOR or VORTAC navaids—
are depicted in black and identified by a “V” (victor) followed by the route
number (e.g., “V12”). In Alaska, some segments of low-altitude airways are
based on LF/MF navaids and are charted in brown instead of black.
LF/MF airways—airways based on LF/MF navaids—are sometimes called
“colored airways” because they are identified by color name and number (e.g.,
“Amber One”, charted as “A1”). Green and Red airways are plotted east and west,
and Amber and Blue airways are plotted north and south. Regardless of their color
identifier, LF/MF airways are shown in brown. U.S. colored airways exist only in
Alaska; those within the conterminous United States have been rescinded.

Airway/
Route Data

On both series of En route Charts, airway/route data such as the airway identifications, bearings or radials, mileages, and altitude (e.g., MEA, MOCA, MAA) are
shown aligned with the airway and in the same color as the airway.

548 / APPENDIX A
Airways/Routes predicated on VOR or VORTAC navaids are defined by
the outbound radial from the navaid. Airways/Routes predicated on LF/MF
navaids are defined by the inbound bearing.
5500
3500G

*3500
V4
30

310

Victor Route (with RNAV/GPS MEA shown in blue)

Area
Navigation
(RNAV) “T”
Route System

The FAA has created new low altitude area navigation (RNAV) routes for the
en route and terminal environments. The RNAV routes will provide more direct
routing for IFR aircraft and enhance the safety and efficiency of the National
Airspace System. To use these routes, aircraft will need to be equipped with IFR
approved Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS). In Alaska, TSO-145a
and 146a equipment is required.
Low altitude RNAV only routes are identified by the letter “T” prefix,
followed by a three-digit number (T-200 to T-500). Routes are depicted in
aeronautical blue on the IFR En route Low Altitude Charts. RNAV route data
(route line, identification boxes, mileages, waypoints, waypoint names, magnetic reference bearings, and MEAs) will also be printed in aeronautical blue.
Magnetic reference bearings will be shown originating from a waypoint, fix/
reporting point, or navaid. A GNSS minimum IFR en route altitude (MEA) for
each segment will be established to ensure obstacle clearance and communications reception. MEAs will be identified with a “G” suffix.
Magnetic
Reference
Bearing
Waypoint

6000G
*5400
T 270
67

CBRYT
087

5000G
T 270
70

088

268

NEHER
269

Joint victor/RNAV routes will be charted as outlined above except as
noted. The joint victor route and the RNAV route identification box shall be
shown adjacent to each other. Magnetic reference bearings will not be shown.
MEAs will be stacked in pairs or in two separate columns, GNSS and victor. On
joint routes, RNAV-specific information will be printed in blue.
7000G GARRY
4400

JON
333

Off Route
Obstruction
Clearance
Altitude
(OROCA)

10

JIMMY
10

10000
7000G
6700

V333

T228
49

KEVIN

10000
8000G
6700

VAL
332

40

109

The Off Route Obstruction Clearance Altitude (OROCA) is represented in
thousands and hundreds of feet above mean sea level. The OROCA represents
the highest possible elevation including both terrain and other vertical obstructions (towers, trees, etc.) bounded by the ticked lines of latitude and longitude.
In this example, the OROCA represents 12,500 feet.

IFR Aeronautical Charts

/

549

OROCA is computed just as the Maximum Elevation Figure (MEF)
found on Visual Charts except that it provides an additional vertical buffer of
1,000 feet in designated nonmountainous areas and a 2,000 foot vertical buffer
in designated mountainous areas within the United States. For areas in Mexico and the Caribbean, located outside the U.S. ADIZ, the OROCA provides
obstruction clearance with a 3,000-foot vertical buffer. Unlike an MEF, when
determining an OROCA the area 4 nautical miles around each quadrant is analyzed for obstructions. Evaluating the area around the quadrant provides the
chart user the same lateral clearance that an airway provides should the line of
intended flight follow a ticked line of latitude or longitude. OROCA does not
provide for navaid signal coverage and communication coverage and would
not be consistent with altitudes assigned by Air Traffic Control. OROCAs can
be found over all land masses and open water areas containing man-made
obstructions (such as oil rigs). OROCAs are shown in every 30 ⫻ 30 minute
quadrant on Area Charts, every 1 degree by 1 degree quadrant for U.S. Low
Altitude En route Charts and every 2 degree by 2 degree quadrant on Alaska
Low En route Charts.
Military
Training
Routes
(MTRs)

Military Training Routes (MTRs) are routes established for the conduct of lowaltitude, highspeed military flight training (generally below 10,000 feet MSL at
airspeeds in excess of 250 knots IAS). These routes are depicted in brown on
En route Low Altitude Charts and are not shown on inset charts or on IFR En
route High Altitude Charts. En route Low Altitude Charts depict all IR (IFR
Military Training Route) and VR (VFR Military Training Route) routes, except
those VRs that are entirely at or below 1,500 feet AGL.
Military Training Routes are identified by designators (IR-107, VR-134),
which are shown in brown on the route centerline. Arrows indicate the direction of flight along the route. The width of the route determines the width of
the line that is plotted on the chart:
Route segments with a width of 5 nautical miles or less, both sides of the
centerline, are shown by a .02⬙ line.
Route segments with a width greater than 5 nautical miles, either or both
sides of the centerline, are shown by a .035⬙ line.

Jet Route
System (High
Altitude En
Route Charts)

Jet routes are based on VOR or VORTAC navaids and are depicted in black
with a “J” identifier followed by the route number (e.g., “J12”). In Alaska,
some segments of jet routes are based on LF/MF navaids and are shown in
brown instead of black.

550 / APPENDIX A
Area
Navigation
(RNAV) “Q”
Route System
(High Altitude
En Route
Charts)

The FAA has adopted certain amendments to Title 14, Code of Federal Regulations that paved the way for the development of new area navigation (RNAV)
routes in the U.S. National Airspace System (NAS). These amendments enable
the FAA to take advantage of technological advancements in navigation systems such as the Global Positioning System (GPS). RNAV “Q” Route MEAs are
shown when other than 18,000⬘. MEAs for GNSS RNAV aircraft are identified
with a “G” suffix. MEAs for DME/DME/IRU RNAV aircraft do not have a “G”
suffix. RNAV routes and associated data are charted in aeronautical blue.
Waypoint
NAMEE

154

MEA - 23000G

Q7

334

Magnetic
Reference
Bearing

300
RNAV Route

Magnetic reference bearings are shown originating from a waypoint, fix/
reporting point, or navaid. Joint Jet/RNAV route identification boxes will be
located adjacent to each other with the route charted in black. With the exception of Q-Routes in the Gulf of Mexico, GNSS or DME/DME/IRU RNAV
are required, unless otherwise indicated. Radar monitoring is required. DME/
DME/IRU RNAV aircraft should refer to the A/FD for DME information. Altitude values are stacked highest to lowest.
MEA - 27000
MEA - 23000G

J12

Q7

300

Joint Jet/RNAV Route

Terrain
Contours on
Area Charts

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) recommended that terrain
be added to Area Charts to increase pilots’ situational awareness of terrain in
the terminal area and to increase the safety of flight. When the terrain on an
Area Chart rises at least 1,000⬘ above the airport elevation, the terrain will be
depicted in shades of brown. The initial contour value (lowest elevation)
depicted will be at least 1,000⬘ but no more than 2,000⬘ above the airport
elevation. The initial contour value may be less than 1,000⬘ only if needed to
depict a rise in terrain close to the airport. Subsequent contour values will be
depicted at a whole 1,000⬘ increment (2,000⬘/4,000⬘, etc., NOT 2,500⬘/4,500⬘,
etc.). The following Area Charts are affected: Anchorage, Denver, Fairbanks,
Juneau, Los Angeles, Phoenix, Prudhoe Bay, San Francisco, and Vancouver.
The following boxed notes are added to affected Area Charts as
necessary:
NOTE: TERRAIN CONTOURS HAVE BEEN ADDED TO
THOSE AREA CHARTS WHERE THE TERRAIN ON THE
CHART IS 1,000 FOOT OR GREATER THAN THE
ELEVATION OF THE PRIMARY AIRPORT.

UNCONTROLLED AIRSPACE BOUNDARIES ARE DEPICTED
WITH A SOLID BROWN LINE AND A .125" WIDE
SHADED BROWN BAND. THE SHADED SIDE REPRESENTS
THE UNCONTROLLED SIDE.

IFR Aeronautical Charts

/

551

IFR EN ROUTE LOW/HIGH ALTITUDE U.S. & ALASKA CHARTS
AIRPORT DATA
LOW/HIGH ALTITUDE

AIRPORT DATA

Airports/Seaplane bases shown in BLUE and GREEN have an approved
Instrument Approach Procedure published. Those in BLUE have an approved
DoD Instrument Approach Procedure and/or DoD RADAR MINIMA
published in DoD FLIPS or FAA TPP. Airports/Seaplane bases shown in
BROWN do not have a published Instrument Approach Procedure.
All IAP Airports are shown on the Low Altituide Charts.
Non-IAP Airports shown on the U.S. Low Altitude Charts have a minimum
hard surface runway of 3,000’.
Non-IAP Airports shown on the Alaska Low Altitude Charts have a
minimum hard or soft surface runway of 3,000’.
Airports shown on the U.S. High Altitude Charts have a minimum hard
surface runway of 5,000’.
Airports shown on the Alaska High Altitude Charts have a minimum hard
or soft surface runway of 4,000’.
Associated city names for public airports are shown above or preceding
the airport name. If airport name and city name are the same, only the
airport name is shown. City names for military and private airports are
not shown.
The airport identifer in parentheses follows the airport name or Pvt.
Airport symbol may be offset for en route navigational aids.
Pvt—Private Use

AIRPORT DATA DEPICTION

LOW ALTITUDE—United States & ALASKA
Associated
City Name
Airport
Name
Airport

Part-time or established by
NOTAM. See Airport/Facility
Directory for times of
operation. In Alaska see
Supplement Alaska
Airspace Class

Airport
Elevation
Automatic
Terminal
Information
Service

Part time

Frequency

Longest runway length to
nearest 100 feet with 70
feet as the dividing point
(add 00)
s indicates soft surface

Lighting Capability:
Lighting available
Pilot Controlled Lighting
Part time or on request

No lighting available
At private facilities—indicates no
lighting information available

For complete information, consult the
Airport/Facility Directory.
1. Airport elevation given in feet above or below mean sea level.
2. Pvt—Private use, not available to general public.
3. A solid line box enclosing the airport name indicates FAR 93
Special Requirements—see Directory/Supplement.
4. "NO SVFR" above the airport name indicates FAR 91
.
C or
Class D Airspace.
6. Airport symbol may be offset for en route navigational aids.
7. Associated city names for public airports are shown above or
preceding the airport name. If airport name and city name are
in parentheses follows the airport name. City names for military
and private airports are not shown.

HIGH ALTITUDE—United States
Associated
City Name

Airport

Airport
Name

HIGH ALTITUDE—ALASKA
Airport
Name

Associated
City Name

Airport
Elevation

Airport

Longest runway length
to nearest 100 feet
Automatic
with 70 feet as the
Terminal
Information Part time Frequency dividing point (add 00)
s indicates soft surface
Service

552 / APPENDIX A

IFR EN ROUTE LOW/HIGH ALTITUDE U.S. & ALASKA CHARTS
AIRPORTS
CIVIL

LOW/HIGH ALTITUDE

CIVIL AND MILITARY

LOW/HIGH ALTITUDE

MILITARY

LOW/HIGH ALTITUDE

SEAPLANE CIVIL

LOW ALTITUDE

HELIPORT

LOW ALTITUDE

RADIO AIDS TO NAVIGATION
VHF OMNIDIRECTIONAL RADIO RANGE (VOR)
Data are
are

DISTANCE MEASURING EQUIPMENT (DME)
TACTICAL AIR NAVIGATION (TACAN)

navaid,

IFR Aeronautical Charts

/

IFR EN ROUTE LOW/HIGH ALTITUDE U.S. & ALASKA CHARTS
RADIO AIDS TO NAVIGATION
NONDIRECTIONAL RADIO BEACON (NDB)
MARINE RADIO BEACON (RBN)

COMPASS LOCATOR BEACON

ILS LOCALIZER

VOR/DME RNAV WAYPOINT DATA

RNAV WAYPOINT

—

553

554 / APPENDIX A

IFR EN ROUTE LOW/HIGH ALTITUDE U.S. & ALASKA CHARTS
NAVIGATION and COMMUNICATION BOXES

IFR Aeronautical Charts

/

IFR EN ROUTE LOW/HIGH ALTITUDE U.S. & ALASKA CHARTS
AIRSPACE INFORMATION
LOW/HIGH ALTITUDE

LOW ALTITUDE AIRWAYS

VHF / UHF Data are is depited in black
LF / MF Data are is depicted in brown
RNAV Route data are is depicted in blue

V4

VOR Airway /
Jet Route

J4

LF /MF Airway
Uncontrolled LF MF
Airway

Oceanic Route

ATS Route
Low Altitude RNAV Route
GNSS Required

T000

HIGH ALTITUDE ROUTES
Waypoint
NAMEE

154

HIGH ALTITUDE
MEA - 23000G

Q7

334

Magnetic
Reference
Bearing
RNAV Route

300
MEA - 27000
MEA - 23000G

J12

Q7

300

Joint Jet/RNAV Route

SINGLE DIRECTION ROUTES
1000-0600Z

1300-0600Z

V 193

Q11

Other times routes revert to bi-directional

DIRECTION OF FLIGHT INDICATOR
SUBSTITUTE ROUTE

UNUSABLE ROUTE

—CANADA

555

556 / APPENDIX A

IFR EN ROUTE LOW/HIGH ALTITUDE U.S. & ALASKA CHARTS
AIRSPACE INFORMATION
BY-PASS ROUTE
that is not part of

AIRWAY RESTRICTION

V4

MILITARY TRAINING ROUTES (MTR)
nm
nm

1,500’

FIXES/ATC REPORTING REQUIREMENTS

LOW/HIGH ALTITUDE
LF/MF

VHF/UHF

Fix—compulsory
Position Report
Coordinates are shown

Fix—noncompulsory
Position Report

Airway away from
VHF/UHF navaid
Airway toward
LF/MF navaid
RNAV
Waypoint—
Compulsory Report
WaypointNoncompulsory Report

TACTICAL AIR NAVIGATION (TACAN) FIX—
ALASKA
RADIALS AND BEARINGS
All radials and bearings are magnetic

navaid
navaid

IFR Aeronautical Charts

/

IFR EN ROUTE LOW/HIGH ALTITUDE U.S. & ALASKA CHARTS
AIRSPACE INFORMATION
FACILITY LOCATORS

LOW /HIGH ALTITUDE

MILEAGES

Total Mileage between
Compulsory Reporting
Points and/or navaids
Mileage between other
Fixes, navaids and/or
Mileage Breakdown

All mileages are nautical (nm)

Mileage Breakdown or
Computer Navigation Fix
(CNF)(no ATC function)

(RCRCP)
parenthesis indicates CNF
with no ATC function

DISTANCE MEASURING EQUIPMENT
(DME) FIX

MINIMUM EN ROUTE ALTITUDE (MEA)
All altitudes are MSL unless otherwise noted

RNAV/GPS MEA

3500
3000G

3500

V4

A0

5500
3500

5500
3500

V4

A0

routes when

J4

MINIMUM EN ROUTE ALTITUDE (MEA) GAP

LOW/HIGH ALTITUDE
V4

MEA is established when
there is a gap in navigation
signal coverage

MAXIMUM AUTHORIZED ALTITUDE (MAA)
All altitudes are MSL unless otherwise noted

V4

J4

routes when

557

558 / APPENDIX A

IFR EN ROUTE LOW/HIGH ALTITUDE U.S. & ALASKA CHARTS
AIRSPACE INFORMATION
MINIMUM OBSTRUCTION CLEARANCE
ALTITUDE (MOCA)
All altitudes are MSL unless otherwise noted

LOW ALTITUDE
5500
*3500

5500
*3500

MOCA

V4
7000
*6300

T266
112

CHANGEOVER POINT
navaids (not shown

ALTITUDE CHANGE
navaids

MINIMUM CROSSING ALTITUDE (MCA)

NEHER
V6 4000 SW

MINIMUM RECEPTION ALTITUDE (MRA)

DIGGS
V6 4000 SW

T244
GRANT 7400 SE

LOW/HIGH ALTITUDE

COPEL

HOLDING PATTERNS

SHIMY

LOW/HIGH ALTITUDE

V4

RNAV Holding Pattern Magnetic Reference Bearing
is determined by the isogonic value at the waypoint
or fix.

6,000’
14,000’

Magnetic
Reference
Bearing

AIR DEFENCE IDENTIFICATION ZONE (ADIZ)

Waypoint
RNAV Holding

IFR Aeronautical Charts

/

IFR EN ROUTE LOW/HIGH ALTITUDE U.S. & ALASKA CHARTS
AIRSPACE INFORMATION
AIR ROUTE TRAFFIC CONTROL CENTER
(ARTCC)

AIR TRAFFIC SERVICE
IDENTIFICATION DATA

ALTIMETER SETTING CHANGE

FLIGHT INFORMATION REGIONS (FIR)

CONTROL AREAS (CTA)

UPPER INFORMATION REGIONS (UIR)

UPPER CONTROL AREAS (UTA)

ADDITIONAL CONTROL AREAS

559

560 / APPENDIX A

IFR EN ROUTE LOW/HIGH ALTITUDE U.S. & ALASKA CHARTS
AIRSPACE INFORMATION
OFF ROUTE OBSTRUCTION CLEARANCE
ALTITUDE (OROCA)

OROCA is computed similarly to the Maximun Elevation
Figure (MEF) found on Visual Charts except that it
provides an additional vertical buffer of 1,000 feet in
designated non-mountainous areas and a 2,000 foot
vertical buffer in designated mountainous areas within
the United States.

SPECIAL USE AIRSPACE
P - Prohibited area
R - Restricted area
W - Warning area
Low only
A - Alert area
Canada only
CYR - Restricted area
CYD - Danger area
CYA - Advisory area
Caribbean only
D - Danger area
In the Caribbean, the first 2 letters represent the
country code, i.e, MY: Bahamas, MU: Cuba
EXCLUSION AREA
AND NOTE

Internal lines delimit
separation of the same
Special Use Areas or
Exclusion Areas
SEE AIRSPACE TABULATION ON EACH CHART
FOR COMPLETE INFORMATION ON:
AREA IDENTIFICATION
EFFECTIVE ALTITUDE
OPERATING TIME
CONTROLLING AGENCY VOICE CALL

SPECIAL USE AIRSPACE Continued
MOA—Military Operations Area

IFR Aeronautical Charts

/

561

IFR EN ROUTE LOW/HIGH ALTITUDE U.S. & ALASKA CHARTS
AIRSPACE INFORMATION
CONTROLLED AIRSPACE

HIGH ALTITUDE
CLASS A AIRSPACE
Open Area (White)
That airspace from 18,000’ MSL to and including FL 600, including the airspace
overlying the waters within 12 nautical miles of the coast of the contiguous
United States and Alaska and designated offshore areas, excluding Santa
Barbara Island, Farallon Island, the airspace south of latitude 25 04’00” N, the
Alaska peninsula west of longitude 160 00’00” W, and the airspace less than
1,500’ AGL.
That airspace from 18,000’ MSL to and including FL 450, including Santa Barbara
Island, Farallon Island, the Alaska peninsula west of longitude 160 00’00” W, and
designated offshore areas.
LOW ALTITUDE
CLASS B AIRSPACE
Screened Blue with a Solid Blue Outline
That airspace from the surface to 10,000’ MSL [unless otherwise designated)
surrounding the nation’s busiest airports. Each Class B airspace area is
individually tailored and consists of a surface area and two or more layers.
MODE C AREA
A Solid Blue Outline
That airspace within 30 NAutical miles of the primary airports of Class B
airspace and within 10 NAutical miles of designated airports. Mode C
transponder equipment is required. (see FAR 91.215).

LOW ALTITUDE
CLASS C AIRSPACE
Screened Blue with a Solid Blue Dashed Outline
That airspace from the surface to 4,000’ (unless otherwise designated) above the
elevation of selected airports (charted in MSL). The normal radius of the outer limits
of Class C airspace is 10 nm. Class C airspace is also indicated by the letter C in a
box following the airport name.

LOW ALTITUDE
CLASS D AIRSPACE
Open Area (White)
That airspace, from the surface to 2,500 (unless otherwise designated) above the
airport elevation (charted in MSL), surrounding those airports that have an operational
control tower. Class D airspace is indicated by the letter D in a box following the
airport name.
LOW ALTITUDE
CLASS E AIRSPACE
Open Area (White)
That controlled airspace below 14,500’ MSL that is not Class B, C, or D.
Federal airways from 1/200’ AG’ Lto but not including 18,000’ MSL (unless
otherwise specified).
Other designated control areas below 14,500’ MSL.
Not Charted
That airspace from 14,500’ MSL to but not including 18,000’ MSL, including the
airspace overlying the waters within 12 nm of the coast of the contiguous United
States and Alaska and designated offshore areas, excluding the Alaska peninsula
west of longitude 160 00’00’’W ana the airspace less than 1,500’ AGL.

562 / APPENDIX A

IFR EN ROUTE LOW/HIGH ALTITUDE U.S. & ALASKA CHARTS
AIRSPACE INFORMATION
CONTROLLED AIRSPACE Canada only

UNCONTROLLED AIRSPACE

LOW/ HIGH ALTITUDE
CLASS G AIRSPACE
Screened Brown Area
Low Altitude
That portion of the airspace below 14,500’ MSL that has not been designated as
Class B, C, D, or E airspace.
High Altitude
That portion of the airspace from 18,000’ MSL and above that has not been
designated as Class A airspace.

CANADIAN AIRSPACE

HIGH ALTITUDE

Appropriate notes as required may be shown.
DOD USERS REFER TO CURRENT DOD (NGA) CHARTS
AND FLIGHT INFORMATION PUBLICATIONS FOR
INFORMATION OUTSIDE OF U.S. AIRSPACE.

NOTE: REFER TO CURRENT CANADIAN
CHARTS AND FLIGHT INFORMATION
PUBLICATIONS FOR INFORMATION WITHIN
CANADIAN AIRSPACE.

AIRSPACE OUTSIDE
OF United States
Other than Canada
Appropriate notes as required may be shown.

AIRSPACE CLASSIFICATION (SEE CANADA
FLIGHT SUPPLEMENT) AND OPERATIONAL
REQUIREMENTS IDOD USERS SEE DOD AREA
PLANNING AP/11 MAY DIFFER BETWEEN
CANADA AND THE UNITED STATES

NAVIGATIONAL AND PROCEDURAL INFORMATION
ISOGONIC LINE AND VALUE
based on the 5 year epoch.

TIME ZONE
During periods of Daylight Saving
Time (DT), effective hours will be one
hour earlier than shown. All states
observe DT except Arizona and Hawaii.

IFR Aeronautical Charts

/

IFR EN ROUTE LOW/HIGH ALTITUDE U.S. & ALASKA CHARTS
ENLARGEMENT AREA

MATCH MARK

LOW/HIGH ALTITUDE

CRUISING ALTITUDES United States only
FL 280

3,000’ AGL

VFR or VFR on Top add 500’
3,000’ AGL

FL 290 to FL 410

No VFR or VFR on Top
FL 285

FL 430

563

564 / APPENDIX A

IFR EN ROUTE LOW/HIGH ALTITUDE U.S. & ALASKA CHARTS
NAVIGATIONAL AND PROCEDURAL INFORMATION
NOTES

LOW/ HIGH ALTITUDE
FAA AIR TRAFFIC SERVICE OUTSIDE U.S. AIRSPACE IS PROVIDED IN ACCORDANCE
WITH ARTICLE 12 AND ANNEX 11 OF ICAO CONVENTION. ICAO CONVENTION
NOT APPLICABLE TO STATE AIRCRAFT BUT COMPLIANCE WITH ICAO STANDARDS AND
PRACTICES IS ENCOURAGED.
CAUTION: POSSIBLE DAMAGE AND/OR INTERFERENCE TO AIRBORNE RADIO DUE TO
HIGH-LEVEL RADIO ENERGY IN THE VICINITY OF R-2206
CAUTION: ACCURACY OF AIR TRAFFIC SERVICES RELATIVE TO HAVANA FIR CANNOT BE
CONFIRMED. CONSULT NOTAMS.
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83), for charting purposes is considered equivalent to
World Geodefic System 1984 (WGS 84).

MORSE CODE

CULTURE
BOUNDARIES
International
U.S. /Russia Maritime Line
Date Line

HYDROGRAPHY
SHORELINE

TOPOGRAPHY
TERRAIN
Area Charts

IFR Aeronautical Charts

/

OCEANIC ROUTE CHARTS—Aeronautical Information
AIRPORTS
Airport of Entry (AOE) shown with four-letter ICAO Identifier

AIRPORT DATA
LANDPLANE—CIVIL Refueling and repair facilities
for normal traffic
LANDPLANE—CIVIL AND MILITARY Refueling
and repair facilities for normal traffic
LANDPLANE—MILITARY Refueling and repair
facilities for normal traffic

RADIO AIDS TO NAVIGATION
VHF OMNIDIRECTIONAL RADIO RANGE (VOR)
DISTANCE MEASURING EQUIPMENT (DME)
TACTICAL AIR NAVIGATION (TACAN)

NON-DIRECTIONAL RADIO BEACON (NDB)
DISTANCE MEASURING EQUIPMENT (DME)

IDENTIFICATION BOX

AIRSPACE INFORMATION
AIR TRAFFIC SERVICE (ATS) OCEANIC ROUTES
Note: Mileages are nautical (nm)
ATS SINGLE DIRECTION ROUTE
AERIAL REFUELING TRACKS

565

566 / APPENDIX A

OCEANIC ROUTE CHARTS—Aeronautical Information
AIRSPACE INFORMATION
AIR DEFENSE IDENTIFICATION ZONE (ADIZ)

AIR ROUTE TRAFFIC CONTROL CENTER
(ARTCC)
FLIGHT INFORMATION REGIONS (FIR)
and/or (CTA)

UPPER INFORMATION REGIONS (UIR)
UPPER CONTROL AREAS (UTA)

OCEANIC CONTROL AREAS (OCA)
and/or (CTA/FIR)

ADDITIONAL OCEANIC CONTROL AREAS
Note: Limits not shown when coincident
with warning areas.

BUFFER ZONE
NON–FREE FLYING ZONE
NORTH ATLANTIC/MINIMUM NAVIGATION
PERFORMANCE SPECIFICATIONS (NAT/MNPS)
REPORTING POINTS
Noncompulsory

SPECIAL USE AIRSPACE
Warning area
Special use
12 mile limit
UNCONTROLLED AIRSPACE

IFR Aeronautical Charts

OCEANIC ROUTE CHARTS—Aeronautical Information
NAVIGATIONAL AND PROCEDURAL INFORMATION
MILEAGE CIRCLES

nm

Note: Mileages are nautical (nm)

Time Zone
Note: All time is Coordinated Universal (Standard)
Time (UTC)

OVERLAP MARKS
NPRC only

COMPASS ROSE
Note: Compass Roses oriented to Magnetic North

NOTES
NON–FREE FLYING TERRITORY

WARNING

CULTURAL BOUNDARIES
INTERNATIONAL
MARITIME
DATELINE

HYDROGRAPHY
SHORELINES

/

567

568 / APPENDIX A

U.S. Terminal Procedures Publication
Explanation of TPP Terms and Symbols
The discussions and examples in this section are based primarily on the IFR
(Instrument Flight Rule) Terminal Procedures Publication (TPP). Other IFR
products use similar symbols in various colors. The publication legends list
aeronautical symbols with a brief description of what each symbol depicts. This
section will provide a more detailed discussion of some of the symbols and how
they are used on TPP charts.
NACO charts are prepared in accordance with specifications of the Interagency Air Cartographic Committee (IACC), which are approved by representatives of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and the Department of Defense
(DoD). Some information on these charts may apply only to military pilots.
Pilot Briefing
Information

The pilot briefing information format consists of three horizontal rows of
boxed procedure-specific information along the top edge of the chart. Altitudes; frequencies; and channel, course, and elevation values (except HATs and
HAAs) are charted in bold type. The top row contains the primary procedure
navigation information, final approach course, landing distance available,
touchdown zone, and airport elevations. The middle row contains procedure
notes and limitations, icons indicating if nonstandard alternate and/or takeoff
minimums apply, approach lighting symbology, and the full text description of
the missed approach procedure. The bottom row contains air to ground communication facilities and frequencies in the order in which they are used during
an approach with the tower frequency box bolded.

W

NOTE: The W symbol indicates that outages of the WAAS vertical guidance
may occur daily at this location due to initial system limitations. WAAS
NOTAMs for vertical outages are not provided for this approach. Use LNAV
minima for flight planning at these locations, whether as a destination or
alternate. For flight operations at these locations, when the WAAS avionics
indicate that LNAV/VNAV or LPV service is available, then vertical guidance
may be used to complete the approach using the displayed level of service.
Should an outage occur during the procedure, reversion to LNAV minima may
be required. As the WAAS coverage is expanded, the W will be removed.

Plan view

The majority of instrument flight procedure charts contain a reference or distance circle. In such cases, only the data within the reference circle are drawn
to scale. This circle is centered on an approach fix and typically has a radius of
10 nautical miles, unless otherwise indicated. When a route segment, outside
the circle, is not to scale, the
symbol interrupts the segment.

IFR Aeronautical Charts

/

569

Obstacles close-in to the airport that cannot be properly depicted in the plan
view are shown on the airport sketch. Some of these obstacles could be controlling obsructions for instrument procedures.
Terrain Depiction Terrain will be depicted in the plan view portion of all IAPs
at airports that meet the following criteria:

NOT FOR NAVIGATION

•

If the terrain within the plan view exceeds 4,000 feet above the
airport elevation or

•

If the terrain within a 6.0 nautical mile radius of the Airport
Reference Point (ARP) rises to at least 2,000 feet above the airport
elevation

Approximately 240 airports throughout the United States
currently meet the above criteria.
The initial contour value (lowest elevation) will be at least
500⬘ but no more than 1,000⬘ above the airport elevation. The
initial contour value may be less than 500⬘ above the airport elevation if needed to depict a rise in terrain close to the runway end.
The next contour value depicted will be at a 1,000⬘ increment
(e.g., 1,000⬘/ 2,000⬘/3,000⬘, etc., NOT 1,500⬘/2,500⬘/3,500⬘,
etc.). Subsequent contour intervals will be constant and at the
most suitable intervals, 1,000⬘ or 2,000⬘, to adequately depict
the rising terrain.

Missed
Approach
Icons

In addition to the full text description of the
missed approach procedure contained in
the notes section of the middle-briefing strip,
the steps are also charted as boxed icons in the
chart profile view. These icons provide simple-to-interpret instructions, such as
direction of initial turn, next heading and/or course, next altitude, and so on.

RNAV Chart
Minima

RNAV instrument approach procedure charts will now incorporate all types of
approaches using Area Navigation systems, both ground based and satellite
based. Below is an explanation of the RNAV minima.
The standard format for RNAV minima (and landing minima) is as shown
below. RNAV minima are dependent on navigational equipment capability, as
stated in the applicable AFM or AFMS, or other FAA approved document, and
as outlined below.
296

300

570 / APPENDIX A
GLS (Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) Landing System) The GLS
(NA) Minima line will be removed from the existing RNAV (GPS) approach
charts when LPV minima is published.
LPV (An Approach Procedure with Vertical Guidance (APV) and precise lateral
based on WAAS) Must have WAAS (Wide Area Augmentation System) avionics approved for LPV approach.
LNAV/VNAV (Lateral Navigation/Vertical Navigation)

Must have either

a. WAAS avionics approved for LNAV/VNAV approach, or
b. A certified Baro-VNAV system with an IFR approach approved GPS,
or
c. A certified Baro-VNAV system with an IFR approach approved WAAS,
or
d. An approach certified RNP-0.3 system.
Other RNAV approach systems require special approval.
NOTES: 1. LNAV/VNAV minima not applicable for Baro-VNAV equipment
if chart is annotated “Baro-VNAV NA” or when below the minimum
published temperature, for example, Baro-VNAV NA below ⫺17° C (2° F).
2. DME/DME-based RNP⫺0.3 systems may be used only when a chart
note indicates DME/DME availability; for example, “DME/DME RNP⫺0.3
Authorized.” Specific DME facilities may be required; for example, “DME/DME
RNP⫺0.3 Authorized, ABC, XYZ required.”

LNAV (Lateral Navigation) Must have IFR approach approved GPS, WAAS,
or RNP⫺0.3 system. Other RNAV systems require special approval.
NOTE: DME/DME RNP⫺0.3 systems may be used only when a chart note
indicates DME/DME availability; for example, “DME/DME RNP⫺0.3
Authorized.” Specific DME facilities may be required; for example, “DME/DME
RNP⫺0.3 Authorized. ABC, XYZ required.”

Terminal
Arrival Areas
(TAAs)

The objective of the Terminal Arrival Area (TAA) is to provide a seamless transition from the en route structure to the terminal environment for arriving aircraft
equipped with Flight Management System (FMS) and/or Global Positioning
System (GPS) navigational equipment. The underlying instrument approach
procedure is an area navigation (RNAV) procedure. The TAA contains within it
a “T” structure that typically provides for a No Procedure Turn (NoPT) for
aircraft using the approach. The TAA provides the pilot and air traffic controller
with a very efficient method for routing traffic into the terminal environment
with little required air traffic control interface and with minimum altitudes
depicted that provide standard obstacle clearance compatible with the instrument procedure associated with it. The TAA will not be found on all RNAV
procedures, particularly in areas of heavy concentration of air traffic. When the

IFR Aeronautical Charts

/

571

TAA is published, it replaces the MSA for that approach procedure. TAAs may
appear on current and new format GPS and RNAV IAP charts.
The standard TAA consists of three areas defined by the extension of the
Initial Approach Fix (IAF) legs and the intermediate segment course. These
areas are called the straight-in, left-base, and the right-base areas. TAA area
lateral boundaries are identified by magnetic courses to the IAF. The straight-in
area can further be divided into pie-shaped sectors with the boundaries identified by magnetic courses to the IF/IAF, and many contain stepdown sections
defined by arcs based on RNAV distances (DME or ATD) from the IF/IAF.
The right/left-base areas can only be subdivided using arcs based on RNAV
distances from the IAFs for those areas.
Straight-in Area: The straight-in area is defined by a semicircle with a
30-nautical miles radius centered on and extending outward from the IF/IAF.
The altitude shown within the straight-in area icon provides minimum IFR
obstacle clearance.
Base Areas: The left and right base areas are bounded by the straight-in TAA
and the extension of the intermediate segment course. The base areas are
defined by a 30-nautical miles radius centered on the IAF on either side of the
IF/IAF. The IF/IAF is shown in the base area icons without its name. The altitude
shown within the base area icons provides minimum IFR obstacle clearance.
in

nm

nm

Minimum MSL altitudes are charted within each of these defined/subdivisions
that provide at least 1,000 feet of obstacle clearance or more as necessary in
mountainous ares.
NOTE: Additional information for the TAAs can be found in the Aeronautical
Information Manual (AIM) Para 5-4-5-d.

572 / APPENDIX A
Alternate
Minimums

When an alternate airport is required, standard FR alternate minimums apply.
Precision approach procedures require a 600⬘ ceiling and 2 statute miles visibility; nonprecision approaches require an 800⬘ ceiling and 2 statute miles visibility. When a appears in the Notes section of the approach chart, it indicates
that nonstandard IFR alternate minimums exist for the airport. This information is found in Section E of the TPP. If
appears, alternate minimums are
not authorized due to unmonitored facility or absence of weather reporting
service. Civil pilots see FAR 91.
Alternate Takeoff Minimums and (Obstacle) Departure Procedures When a
appears in the Notes section, it signifies that the airport has nonstandard IFR
takeoff minimums.
CIVIL USERS NOTE: FAR 91 prescribes standard takeoff rules and
establishes takeoff minimums for certain operators as follows: (1) Aircraft having two engines or less—one statute mile. (2) Aircraft having more than two
engines—one-half statute mile. These standard minima apply in the absence of
any different minima listed in Section C of the TPP.
ALL USERS: Airports that have Departure Procedures (DPs) designed
specifically to assist pilots in avoiding obstacles during the climb to the
minimum en route altitude, and/or airports that have civil IFR takeoff minimums other than standard, are listed in Section C of the TPP by city. Takeoff
Minimums and Departure Procedures apply to all runways unless otherwise
specified. Altitudes, unless otherwise indicated, are minimum altitudes in MSL.
DPs specifically designed for obstacle avoidance may be described in
Section C of the TPP in text or published as a graphic procedure. Its name will
be listed, and it can be found in either the TPPs (civil) or a separate Departure Procedure volume (military), as appropriate. Users will recognize graphic
obstacle DPs by the word “(OBSTACLE)” included in the procedure title; for
example, TETON TWO (OBSTACLE). If not assigned another DP or radar
vector by ATC, this procedure should be flown if visual avoidance of terrain/
obstacles cannot be maintained.
Graphic DPs designed by ATC to standardize traffic flows, ensure aircraft
separation, and enhance capacity are referred to as “Standard Instrument Departures (SIDs)”. SIDs also provide obstacle clearance and are published under the
appropriate airport section. ATC clearance must be received prior to flying SID.
NOTE: Graphic Departure Procedures that have been designed primarily to
assist Air Traffic Control in providing air traffic separation (as well as providing
obstacle clearance) are usually assigned by name in an ATC clearance and are
not listed by name in Section C of the TPP.

RNAV Departure Procedures (DP) and Standard Terminal Arrival Routes
(STAR) RNAV DPs and STARs are being developed to support a more efficient traffic flow and further National Airspace System (NAS) capacity. These
procedures will be flown only by those aircraft with onboard databases. These
procedures will extend over a larger geographic area to allow ATC spacing and
sequencing to occur en route. In order to reduce the number of pages required

IFR Aeronautical Charts

/

573

to depict these longer procedures, changes to the graphic depictions and textual
data are necessary.
Navaid boxes will be removed and identified with only the name, the
three-letter ident, and the applicable symbol. Waypoints will be identified with
waypoint symbol and five-letter name. Waypoints that overlay navaids will be
depicted only as navaids, not as a waypoint. A single graphic will be used when
possible; however, if not feasible, the common portion of the procedure will be
shown on a single page with transitions contained on subsequent pages. Subsequent pages will be subtitled with the transition area, that is, CHEZZ ONE
DEPARTURE Northeast Transitions or JHAWK TWO ARRIVAL South Transitions. Text remarks that apply to the entire procedure, or all transitions, will
be charted on the page that contains the common point and common portion of
the procedure. Text remarks that apply to a specific transition will be charted on
the page that contains that transition. Transition text will not include a description of the route but will instead state expectations for altitudes, clearances, FL
restrictions, aircraft constraints, specific airport arrival use, and so on.
There are two types of RNAV SIDs and graphic Obstacle DPs (ODPs): Type
A and Type B. Type A generally starts with a heading or vector from the departure
runway end, and Type B generally starts with an initial RNAV leg near the departure runway end. Type A procedures require the aircraft’s track keeping accuracy
remain bounded by ± 2 nautical miles for 95% of the total flight time (Type B
bounded by ± 1 nautical miles ). See the AIM for more specific information.
RNAV Procedures Legs (IAPs, SIDs/DPs, and STARs) Due to the variations
in the development, documentation, charting, and database coding of RNAV
Procedures (IAPs, STARs, SIDs/DPs), it has become necessary to chart RNAV
legs with specific information based on their type. This data depiction will provide pilots with a clearer indication of the type of leg the aircraft will be flying
and the ensuing flight profile.
• Heading—no waypoints shown, “hdg” charted after degrees (i.e., 330° hdg), no
mileage shown
• Direct—waypoint at termination of leg, no course shown, no mileage shown
• Course—waypoint at termination of leg, course shown, mileage shown only if
first leg upon departure
• Track—waypoints at beginning and termination of leg, course shown, mileage shown

Leg mileages will be listed differently based on certain criteria. Mileages
on Course and Track legs will be shown to the nearest one-tenth of a nautical
mile when all three of the following conditions are met:
Leg termination is 30 nautical miles or less to the Airport Reference Point
(ARP) (for STARs, leg origination must be 30 nautical miles or less from the
ARP for the primary airport) and
• leg segment is less than 30 nautical miles and,
• leg segment is not part of the en route structure.

In all other instances, leg mileages will be rounded off to the nearest
whole nautical miles, as they are currently.

574 / APPENDIX A

U.S. TERMINAL PROCEDURES PUBLICATION:
Aeronautical Information

Instrument Approach Chart Format

{

Pilot Briefing
Information

NOT FOR NAVIGATION
Terminal Arrival
Areas (TAAs)

Missed
Approach
Icons

RNAV Minima

{

IFR Aeronautical Charts

U.S. TERMINAL PROCEDURES PUBLICATION:
Aeronautical Information
STANDARD TERMINAL ARRIVAL (STAR) CHARTS DEPARTURE
PROCEDURE (DP) CHARTS
RADIO AIDS TO NAVIGATION

VOR

TACAN

VOR/DME

NDB/DME

VORTAC

LOC/DME
LOC

NDB (Non-directional Beacon)
LMM, LOM (Compass locator)
Marker Beacon
Localizer Course
SDF Course

En route Chart

Radial Distance

Localizer Offset

REPORTING POINTS/FIXES
WAYPOINTS

(NAME) (" " omitted when it conflicts with runway pattern)

WAYPOINT (Compulsory)
WAYPOINT (Noncompulsory)
FLYOVER POINT
MAP WP (Flyover)

/

575

576 / APPENDIX A

U.S. TERMINAL PROCEDURES PUBLICATION:
Aeronautical Information
STANDARD TERMINAL ARRIVAL (STAR) CHARTS & DEPARTURE
PROCEDURE (DP) CHARTS
ROUTES

MEA—Minimum Enroute Altitude

6,000’ to and
14,000’

SPECIAL USE AIRSPACE
ALTITUDES

R—Restricted

W—Warning

P—Prohibited

A—Alert

5500

2300

Mandatory
Altitude

Minimum
Altitude

Maximum
Altitude

(Cross at)

(Cross at
or above)

(Cross at
or below)

4800

2200
Recommended
Altitude

AIRPORTS
STAR Charts
DP Charts

NOTES
noncontinuously

;

and

W

WAAS VNAV outages may occur daily due to
initial system limitations. WAAS VNAV NOTAM
service is not provided for this approach.

IFR Aeronautical Charts

U.S. TERMINAL PROCEDURES PUBLICATION:
Aeronautical Information
APPROACH LIGHTING SYSTEM
RUNWAY TOUCHDOWN ZONE AND CENTERLINE
LIGHTING SYSTEMS

SHORT APPROACH LIGHTING SYSTEM

NOTE

2,400/3,000 FEET

APPROACH LIGHTING SYSTEM

2,400/3,000 FEET

/

577

578 / APPENDIX A

U.S. TERMINAL PROCEDURES PUBLICATION:
Aeronautical Information
APPROACH LIGHTING SYSTEM
SHORT APPROACH LIGHTING SYSTEM

SALS/SALSF
(High Intensity)
SAME AS INNER 1,500' of ALSF-1

SIMPLIFIED SHORT APPROACH LIGHTING
SYSTEM WITH RUNWAY ALIGNMENT
INDICATOR LIGHTS

SSALR

SSALR

(High Intensity)

LENGTH 2,400/3,000 FEET

MEDIUM INTENSITY (MALS AND MALSF)
OR SIMPLIFIED SHORT (SSALS AND
SSALF)

MALS, MALSF,
SSALS, SSALF

APPROACH LIGHTING SYSTEM
MALS
MALSF
SSALS
SSALF
LENGTH 1,400 FEET

MEDIUM INTESITY APPROACH LIGHTING
SYSTEM WITH RUNWAY ALIGNMENT
INDICATOR LIGHTS
MALSR

MALSR

SAME LIGHT CONFIGURATION
AS SSALR.

OMNIDIRECTIONAL APPROACH LIGHTING
SYSTEM

ODALS

ODALS

1,500 FEET

IFR Aeronautical Charts

U.S. TERMINAL PROCEDURES PUBLICATION:
Aeronautical Information
APPROACH LIGHTING SYSTEM
VISUAL APPROACH SLOPE INDICATOR

VASI

VASI

“T” VISUAL APPROACH SLOPE INDICATOR

"T"-VASI

“T”-VASI

—
—
—

/

579

580 / APPENDIX A

U.S. TERMINAL PROCEDURES PUBLICATION:
Aeronautical Information
APPROACH LIGHTING SYSTEM
VISUAL APPROACH SLOPE INDICATOR

VASI

VASI

PRECISION APPROACH PATH INDICATOR
PAPI

PAPI

IFR Aeronautical Charts

U.S. TERMINAL PROCEDURES PUBLICATION:
Aeronautical Information
APPROACH LIGHTING SYSTEM
PULSATING
VISUAL APPROACH
SLOPE INDICATOR

PVASI

PVASI

TRI-COLOR
VISUAL APPROACH
SLOPE INDICATOR

TRCV

TRCV

ALIGNMENT
OF ELEMENT
SYSTEMS

APAP

APAP

,

/

581

582 / APPENDIX A

U.S. TERMINAL PROCEDURES PUBLICATION:
Aeronautical Information
AIRPORT DIAGRAM/SKETCH
ARRESTING GEAR

unidirectional
bidirectional
Jet Barrier
for
example,

REFERENCE FEATURES

Buildings
Tanks
Obstruction
Highest Obstruction
Airport Beacon
Runway Radar Reflectors
Control Tower #

Helicopter Alighting Areas

Negative Symbols used to
identify Copter Procedures
landing point

Runway TDZ elevation
Runway Slope
(shown when runway slope equals or
exceeds 0.3%)
NOTE:

8,000 feet or longer.

NOTES

Magnetic

1-,
-

NOTE:

1-

-minute

IFR Aeronautical Charts

U.S. TERMINAL PROCEDURES PUBLICATION:
Aeronautical Information
AIRPORT DIAGRAM/SKETCH
RUNWAYS

Hard Surface

Closed Runway

Other than hard surface

Closed Taxiway

Stopways, Taxiways,
Parking Areas

Under Construction
Metal Surface

Displaced Threshold

Runway Centerline Lighting

5,000’.

Airport Facility

Computer-Based

/

583

584 / APPENDIX A

U.S. TERMINAL PROCEDURES PUBLICATION:
Aeronautical Information
INSTRUMENT APPROACH PROCEDURES PLAN VIEW
TERMINAL ROUTES

Procedure Track
Missed Approach
Visual Flight Path
Procedure Turn
(Type, degree, and
point of turn
optional)
nm

HOLDING PATTERNS

Missed Approach

Arrival

Limits will only be specified when they deviate
from the standard.
Holding pattern with max. restricted airspeed:
(175K) applies to all altitudes.
(210K) applies to altitudes above 6,000' to and
including 14,000'
DME fixes may be shown.

REPORTING POINTS/FIXES/WAYPOINTS

IFR Aeronautical Charts

U.S. TERMINAL PROCEDURES PUBLICATION:
Aeronautical Information
INSTRUMENT APPROACH PROCEDURES PLAN VIEW
RADIO AIDS TO NAVIGATIONS

VOR

VOR/DME

TACAN

VORTAC

NDB

NDB/DME

LOM/LMM (Compass locator
at Outer/Middle Marker)
Marker Beacon
Localizer
(LOC/LDA) Right side shading—Front Course
Left side shading—Back Course
Course
SDF Course

LOC/DME
LOC/LDA/SDF/MLS Transmitter
(shown when installation is offset from its
normal position off the end of the runway.)

MINIMUM SAFE ALTITUDE

nm

/

585

586 / APPENDIX A

U.S. TERMINAL PROCEDURES PUBLICATION:
Aeronautical Information
INSTRUMENT APPROACH PROCEDURES PLAN VIEW
TERMINAL ARRIVAL AREAS
Straight-in Area
15 nm

15
m

nm

12

n

Minimum MSL altitudes are charted
within each of these defined
areas/subdivisions that provide at least
1,000 feet of obstacle clearance, or more
as necessary in mountainous areas.

SPECIAL USE AIRSPACE
OBSTACLES

FACILITIES / FIXES

ALTITUDES

—

—

—

—

IFR Aeronautical Charts

U.S. TERMINAL PROCEDURES PUBLICATION:
Aeronautical Information
INSTRUMENT APPROACH PROCEDURES PLAN VIEW
MISCELLANEOUS

Final Approach Fix (FAF)
(for nonprecision approaches)
Glide Slope/Glide Path Intercept
Altitude and final approach fix
for vertically guided approach
procedures.
Visual Descent Point (VDP)
Visual Flight Path

/

587

588 / APPENDIX A

U.S. TERMINAL PROCEDURES PUBLICATION:
Aeronautical Information
INSTRUMENT APPROACH PROCEDURES PROFILE VIEW
PROFILE VIEW

ILS or LOC APPROACH
Glide Slope Altitude
at Outer Marker/FAF
FAF (vertically guided approaches)
FAF (nonprecision approaches)
ILS
Missed Approach Point
Glide Slope
Missed Approach Track

Procedure Turn

Glide Slope
Threshold Crossing Height
Glide Slope Intercept Altitude

Airport Profile
Two different methods are used for vertical guidance:
ILS and LNAV/VNAV use

in the lower left or right corner.

"GS" indicates that an electronic glide slope is present in the case of an ILS approach and precision vertical guidance for
LNAV/VNAV.
or

MLS APPROACH

M-AJE
6.5

36

3300
Glidepath 3.00
TCH 50

0

3250

Final Approach Fix (FAF)
M-AJE
2.2
MLS
Glidepath

180

MLS 00 R/L

Glidepath Altitude at FAF

3300

RNAV APPROACH

that

NONPRECISION

DESCENT FROM HOLDING PATTERN

Final Approach
Segment Vertical
Descent Angle (VDA)
Visual Descent Point (VDP)

APPENDIX B

Aircraft Models
and Performance
Explanation of Codes
Weight Class
Code

Type

/S

Small U.S. designated aircraft of 12,500 lbs or less

/S+

Small ‘Plus’ U.S. designated aircraft weighing between 12,500 and 41,000 lbs

/Lt

Light ICAO designated aircraft of 15,500 lbs or less

/L

Large U.S. designated aircraft of more than 41,000 lbs and less than 255,000 lbs

/M

Medium ICAO designated aircraft of more than 15,500 lbs and less than 300,000 lbs

/H

Heavy U.S. designated aircraft of 255,000 lbs or more. ICAO designated aircraft of
300,000 lbs or more

Type/Weight
Class

Designator

Climb Rate
(FPM)

Descent Rate
(FPM)

500 Commander

L2P/S

AC50

1,340

1,500

II

560 Commander

L2P/S

AC56

1,400

1,500

II

680F Commander

L2P/S

AC68

1,375

1,375

II

680FL Grand Commander

L2P/S

AC6L

1,250

1,250

II

680T Turbo Commander

L2T/S

AC80

2,000

1,500

II

1121 Jet Commander

L2J/S+

JCOM

5,000

4,500

III

H2T

AS65

A300B4600

L2J/H

A306

3,500

3,500

III

A310

L2J/H

A310

3,500

3,500

III

A319

L2J/L

A319

3,500

3,500

III

A320

L2J/L

A320

3,500

3,500

III

A321

L2J/L

A321

3,500

3,500

III

A300ST Super Transporter, Beluga

L2J/H

A3ST

Model

SRS
Cat.

AERO COMMANDER

AEROSPATIALE
HH65 Dolphin
AIRBUS

(continued)

590 / APPENDIX B
Type/Weight
Class

Designator

Climb Rate
(FPM)

Descent Rate
(FPM)

SRS
Cat.

A318

L2J/M

A318

3,500

3,500

III

A330200

L2J/H

A332

A330300

L2J/H

A333

A340200

L4J/H

A342

A340300

L4J/H

A343

3,500

3,500

III

A340500

L4J/H

A345

A340600

L4J/H

A346

ATR42200/300/320

L2T/L

AT43

2,000

2,000

III

ATR42400

L2T/L

AT44

2,000

2,000

III

ATR42500

L2T/L

AT45

2,000

2,000

III

ATR72

L2T/L

AT72

2,000

2,000

III

H1T/S

B06

1,200

1,000

I

Model

BELUGA

ATR

BELL
206 JetRanger,
206LT TwinRanger

H2T

B06T

V22 Osprey (901)

T2T/L

V22

212

H2T/S

B212

214

H1T

B214

222

H2T/S

B222

L2J/L

B712

II
1,420

1,420

I

1,500

1,000

I

BOEING
717200

III

727 Stage 3 (United States only)

L3J/L

B72Q

4,500

4,500

III

727100, C22

L3J/L

B721

4,500

4,500

III

727200

L3J/L

B722

4,500

4,500

III

737100

L2J/L

B731

3,000

3,000

III

737200, CT43, VC96

L2J/L

B732

3,000

3,000

III

737300

L2J/L

B733

5,500

3,500

III

737400

L2J/L

B734

6,500

3,500

III

737500

L2J/L

B735

5,500

3,500

III

737600

L2J/L

B736

4,000

4,000

III

737700, BBJ, C40

L2J/L

B737

4,000

4,000

III

737800, BBJ2

L2J/L

B738

4,000

4,000

III

737900

L2J/M

B739

747100

L4J/H

B741

3,000

3,000

III

747200, E4, VC25

L4J/H

B742

3,000

3,000

III

Aircraft Models and Performance

Model

Type/Weight
Class

Designator

747300

L4J/H

B743

747400

L4J/H

B744

747SP

L4J/H

747SR

/

591

Climb Rate
(FPM)

Descent Rate
(FPM)

SRS
Cat.

3,000

3,000

III

B74S

3,000

3,000

III

L4J/H

B74R

3,000

3,000

III

757200, C32

L2J/L

B752

3,500

2,500

III

757300

L2J/H

B753

3,500

2,500

III

767200

L2J/H

B762

3,500

3,500

III

767300

L2J/H

B763

3,500

3,500

III

767400

L2J/H

B764

777200

L2J/H

B772

2,500

2,500

III

777300

L2J/H

B773

2,500

2,500

III

B52 Stratofortress

L8J/H

B52

3,000

3,000

III

C135B

L4J/H

C135

2,000

2,000

III

C17 Globemaster

L4J/H

C17

E3A Sentry

L4J/H

E3CF

E767

L2J/H

E767

2,500

2,500

III

F15 Eagle

L2J/L

F15

8,000

5,000

III

F22 Raptor

L2J/M

F22

FA18 Super Hornet

L2J/L

F18

8,000

6,000

III

KC135 Stratotanker

L4J/H

K35R

5,000

3,000

III

MD10

L3J/H

DC10

MD11

L3J/H

MD11

MD81

L2J/L

MD81

MD82

L2J/L

MD82

MD83

L2J/L

MD83

MD87

L2J/L

MD87

MD88

L2J/L

MD88

MD90

L2J/L

MD90

BD100 Challenger 300

L2J/M

CL30

BD700 Global 5000

l2J/M

GL5T

CL600 Challenger 600

L2J/M

CL60

CL600 Regional Jet CRJ-100

L2J/M

CRJ1

CL600 Regional Jet CRJ-200, RJ-200 L2J/M

CRJ2

III

III

III

BOMBARDIER

CANADAIR

(continued)

592 / APPENDIX B

Model

Type/Weight
Class

Designator

Climb Rate
(FPM)

Descent Rate
(FPM)

CL600 Regional Jet CRJ-700

L2J/M

CRJ7

CL600 Regional Jet CRJ-900

L2J/M

CRJ9

T303 Crusader

L2P/S

650 Citation 3/6/7
P210 Pressurized Centurion

SRS
Cat.

C303

3,500

3,000

II

L2J/S+

C650

3,900

4,000

III

L1P/S

P210

1,000

1,000

I

T337G, P337 Pressurized
Skymaster

L2P/S

P337

1,250

1,500

II

T37

L2J/S

T37

3,000

3,000

III

150

L1P/S

C150

670

1,000

I

152

L1P/S

C152

750

1,000

I

CESSNA

170

L1P/S

C170

690

1,000

I

172 Skyhawk

L1P/S

C172

650

1,000

I

172RG Cutlass RG

L1P/S

C72R

650

1,000

I

175 Skylark

L1P/S

C175

850

1,000

I

177 Cardinal

L1P/S

C177

850

1,000

I

177RG Cardinal RG

L1P/S

C77R

850

1,000

I

180 Skywagon

L1P/S

C180

1,130

1,130

I

182 Skylane

L1P/S

C182

890

1,000

I

206 Super Skywagon

L1P/S

C206

975

1,000

I

208 Caravan 1

L1T/S

C208

1,400

1,400

I

210, T210, (Turbo) Centurion

L1P/S

C210

900

1,000

I

310

L2P/S

C310

2,000

1,700

II

320 (Executive) Skyknight

L2P/S

C320

2,900

2,000

II

335

L2P/S

C335

2,200

2,000

II

336 Skymaster

L2P/S

C336

1,340

1,340

II

337 Super Skymaster (O2)

L2P/S

C337

1,250

1,500

II

340

L2P/S

C340

2,900

2,000

II

404 Titan

L2P/S

C404

2,600

2,000

II

411

L2P/S

C411

2,800

2,000

II

207 (Turbo) Skywagon 207

L1P/S

C207

810

1,000

I

414 Chancellor

L2P/S

C414

2,300

2,000

II

421 Golden Eagle

L2P/S

C421

3,200

2,000

II

425 Corsair, Conquest 1

L2T/S

C425

3,500

2,500

II

441 Conquest, Conquest 2

L2T/S

C441

4,200

3,000

II

Aircraft Models and Performance

Model

Type/Weight
Class

Designator

500 Citation, Citation 1

L2J/S

501 Citation 1SP

L2J/S

525 CitationJet Citation CJ1

/

593

Climb Rate
(FPM)

Descent Rate
(FPM)

SRS
Cat.

C500

3,100

3,500

III

C501

4,300

3,000

III

L2J/S

C525

3,000

525B Citation CJ3

L2J/S+

C25B

3,000

525A Citation CJ2

L2J/L

C25A

526 CitationJet

L2J/S

C526

3,000

551 Citation 2SP

L2J/S

C551

5,300

3,000

III

560XL Citation Excel

L2J/M

C56X

560 Citation 5

L2J/S+

C560

6,000

3,500

III

680 Citation Sovereign

L2J/M

C680

750 Citation 10

L2J/S+

C750

3,500

3,500

III

III
3,000

III
III

401, 402, Utililiner, Businessliner

L2P/S

C402

2,500

2,000

II

550, S550, 552 Citation

L2J/S+

C550

5,300

3,000

III

SR20

L1P/Lt

SR20

SR22

L1P/L

SR22

VK30 Cirrus

L1P/Lt

VK3P

Falcon 10, Mystère 10

L2J/S+

FA10

2,300

1,600

III

Falcon 20, Mystère 20

L2J/S+

FA20

2,000

2,200

III

Falcon 50, Mystère 50

L3J/S+

FA50

1,800

1,600

III

Falcon 900, Mystère 900

L3J/L

F900

2,000

1,700

III

Falcon 2000

L2J/S+

F2TH

2,500

1,500

III

DHC8100 Dash 8

L2T/L

DH8A

1,500

1,500

III

DHC8200 Dash 8

L2T/L

DH8B

1,500

1,500

III

DHC8300 Dash 8

L2T/L

DH8C

1,500

1,500

III

DHC8400 Dash 8

L2T/L

DH8D

2,500

2,500

III

DHC7 Dash 7

L4T/M

DHC7

4,000

4,000

III

DA40 Katana, Diamond Star

L1P/Lt

DA40

DA42 Twinstar

L2P/S

DA42

1,500

1,500

II

DA20/22

L1P/L

DV20

730

L2P/S+

DC3

1,200

CIRRUS

DASSAULT

DE HAVILLAND CANADA

DIAMOND

I

DOUGLAS
DC3 Dakota

1,200

III
(continued)

594 / APPENDIX B

Model

Type/Weight
Class

Designator

Climb Rate
(FPM)

Descent Rate
(FPM)

SRS
Cat.

DC4 Skymaster

L4P/L

DC6 Liftmaster

L4P/L

DC4

2,300

2,300

III

DC6

1,000

1,000

III

DC7

L4P/L

DC7

1,250

1,250

III

DC910

L2J/M

DC91

DC920

L2J/M

DC92

DC930

L2J/M

DC93

DC940

L2J/M

DC94

DC950

L2J/M

DC95

L2J/S

EA50

EMB110/111 Bandeirante

L2T/S+

E110

1,500

1,500

II

EMB120 Brasilia

L2T/S+

E120

2,300

2,300

III

EMB135, ECJ135, Legacy

L2J/M

E135

EMB145, ERJ145

L2J/L

E145

170, 175, ERJ170

L2J/M

E170

190, 195, ERJ190

L2J/M

E190

24

L2J/S+

LJ24

4,500

4,000

III

25

L2J/S+

LJ25

4,500

4,000

III

28, 29

L2J/S+

LJ28

4,500

4,000

III

31

L2J/S+

LJ31

4,500

4,000

III

35, 36

L2J/S+

LJ35

4,500

4,000

III

55

L2J/S+

LJ55

5,000

4,000

III

L1J/L

F16

8,000

5,000

III

G159 Gulfstream 1

L2T/S+

G159

2,000

2,000

III

G1159, G1159B Gulfstream
2/2B/2SP

L2J/L

GLF2

5,000

4,000

III

AA1 Trainer, Lynx

L1P/S

AA1

850

1,250

I

AA5 Traveler, Cheetah, Tiger

L1P/S

AA5

660

1,000

I

GA7 Cougar

L2P/S

GA7

1,600

1,500

II

ECLIPSE
Eclipse 500
EMBRAER

2,350

III

GATES LEARJET

GENERAL DYNAMICS
F16A/B/C/D/N, Fighting Falcon
GRUMMAN

GRUMMAN AMERICAN

Aircraft Models and Performance

Designator

L2T/S

595

Climb Rate
(FPM)

Descent Rate
(FPM)

AC90

2,500

2,500

II

695 Jetprop Commander 980/1000 L2T/S

AC95

2,500

2,500

II

G1159A Gulfstream 3

GLF3

5,000

4,000

III

Model

Type/Weight
Class

/

SRS
Cat.

GULFSTREAM AEROSPACE
690 Jetprop Commander 840/900

L2J/L

G1159C Gulfstream 4/4SP

L2J/L

GLF4

5,000

4,000

III

G1159D Gulfstream 5

L2J/L

GLF5

5,000

4,000

III

18

L2P/S

BE18

1,400

1,000

II

19 Musketeer Sport

L1P/S

BE19

680

680

I

23 Musketeer, Sundowner

L1P/S

BE23

740

800

I

24 Musketeer Super, Sierra

L1P/S

BE24

1,000

1,000

I

33 Bonanza

L1P/S

BE33

1,000

1,000

I

33 Debonair, Bonanza

L1P/S

BE33

1,000

1,000

I

35 Bonanza

L1P/S

BE35

1,200

1,200

I

36 Bonanza

L1P/S

BE36

1,100

1,100

I

50 Twin Bonanza

L2P/S

BE50

1,600

1,600

II

55 Baron

L2P/S

BE55

1,700

1,700

II

56 Turbo Baron

L2P/Lt

BE56

58 Baron

L2P/S

BE58

1,730

1,730

II

58 Baron

L2P/S

BE58

1,730

1,730

II

60 Duke

L2P/S

BE60

1,600

1,600

II

65 Queen Air

L2P/S

BE65

1,300

1,300

II

70 Queen Air

L2P/Lt

BE70

76 Duchess

L2P/S

BE76

1500

1,500

II

77 Skipper

L1P/S

BE77

750

750

I

88 Queen Air

L2P/Lt

BE88

90, A90 to E90 King Air

L2T/S

BE9L

2,000

2,000

II

90 King Air

L2T/S

BE9L

2,000

2,000

II

99 Airliner

L2T/S

BE99

1,750

1,750

II

100 King Air

L2T/S

BE10

2,250

2,250

II

200, 1300 Super King Air,
Commuter

L2T/S+

BE20

2,450

2,500

II

200 Super King Air

L2T/S+

BE20

2,450

2,500

II

300 Super King Air

L2T/S+

BE30

3,000

3,000

III

HAWKER BEECHCRAFT

(continued)

596 / APPENDIX B

Model

Type/Weight
Class

Climb Rate
(FPM)

Descent Rate
(FPM)

SRS
Cat.

300 Super King Air

L2T/S+

400 Beechjet

L2J/S+

BE30

3,000

3,000

III

BE40

3,300

2,200

III

1900

L2T/S+

B190

2,400

2,400

III

B300 Super King Air 350

L2T/S+

B350

3,000

3,000

III

Hawker 750

L2J/S+

H25B

3,000

4,000

III

Hawker 800

L2J/S+

H25B

3,000

4,000

III

Hawker 800XP

L2J/S+

H25B

3,000

4,000

III

Hawker 850XP

L2J/S+

H25B

3,000

4,000

III

Hawker 900XP

L2J/S+

H25B

3,000

4,000

III

Hawker 1000

L2J/S+

H25C

3,000

4,000

III

Hawker 4000

L2J/S+

HA4T

3,500

4,000

III

Hawker Horizon

L2J/M

HA4T

Premier 1

L2J/S+

PRM1

3,000

3,000

III

T34C Turbo Mentor

L1T/S

T34T

1,100

1,000

I

L2J/Lt

MH02

23

L2J/S

LJ23

4,500

4,000

III

24

L2J/S+

LJ24

4,500

4,000

III

25

L2J/S+

LJ25

4,500

4,000

III

31

L2J/S+

LJ31

4,500

4,000

III

35

L2J/S+

LJ35

4,500

4,000

III

40

L2J/M

LJ40

45

L2J/S+

LJ45

4,500

4,000

III

55

L2J/S+

LJ55

5,000

4,000

III

60

L2J/S+

LJ60

5,000

4,000

III

C130, L-100

L4T/L

C130

1,500

1,500

III

C141 Starlifter

L4J/H

C141

3,500

3,000

III

C5 Galaxy

L4J/H

C5

2,500

2,000

III

F117 Nighthawk

L2J/M

F117

F16 Fighting Falcon

L1J/L

F16

8,000

5,000

III

F22 Raptor

L2J/M

F22

L1011 TriStar

L3J/H

L101

3,500

3,000

III

P3 Orion

L4T/L

P3

1,850

2,000

III

Designator

HONDA
MH02
LEAR JET

LOCKHEED

Aircraft Models and Performance

Descent Rate
(FPM)

597

Type/Weight
Class

Designator

C17 Globemaster 3

L4J/H

C17

DC10, MD10, KC10

L3J/H

DC10

2,400

2,000

III

F15 Eagle

L2J/L

F15

8,000

5,000

III

8,000

6,000

Model

Climb Rate
(FPM)

/

SRS
Cat.

MCDONNELL DOUGLAS
III

FA18 Hornet, Super Hornet

L2J/L

F18

MD11

L3J/H

MD11

III

DC910

L2J/M

DC91

DC920

L2J/M

DC92

DC930 (C9, VC9, Nightingale,
Skytrain 2)

L2J/M

DC93

DC940

L2J/M

DC94

DC950

L2J/M

DC95

MD81/82/83/87/88

L2J/L

MD81/
MD82/
MD83/
MD87/
MD88

3,500

3,000

III

MU2 Marquise, Solitaire

L2T/S

MU2

3,500

3,000

II

MU300 Diamond

L2J/S+

MU30

3,500

4,000

III

M20 Mark 21

L1P/S

M20P

1,000

1,000

I

M22 Mustang

L1P/S

M22

1,300

1,300

I

112 Commander

L1P/S

AC11

1,000

1,200

I

500 Commander, Shrike
Commander

L2P/S

AC50

1,340

1,500

II

200 Commander

L1P/S

M200

1,400

1,000

I

NA265 Sabreliner

L2J/S+

SBR1

4,000

3,500

III

NA265 Sabre 75

L2J/M

SBR2

B2 Spirit

L4J/H

B2

T38, AT38 Talon

L2J/S+

T38

8,000

5,000

III

J3 Cub (L4, NE)

L1P/S

J3

500

500

I

PA23 Aztec

L2P/S

PA27

1,500

1,500

II

PA24 Comanche

L1P/S

PA24

900

1,000

I

III

MITSUBISHI

MOONEY

NORTH AMERICAN ROCKWELL

NORTHROP

PIPER

(continued)

598 / APPENDIX B

Model

Type/Weight
Class

Designator

Climb Rate
(FPM)

Descent Rate
(FPM)

SRS
Cat.

PA28 Cherokee

L1P/S

P28A

750

1,000

I

PA28R Arrow

L1P/S

P28R

750

1,000

I

PA28RT Turbo Arrow 4

L1P/S

P28T

900

1,000

I

PA30/39 Twin Comanche

L2P/S

PA30

1,500

1,500

II

PA31T1500 Cheyenne 1

L2T/S

PAY1

2,200

2,000

II

PA31T620 Cheyenne 2

L2T/S

PAY2

2,400

2,000

II

PA32 Cherokee Six

L1P/S

PA32

850

1,000

I

PA32R Cherokee Lance

L1P/S

P32R

850

1,000

I

PA32RT Turbo Lance 2

L1P/S

P32T

850

1,000

I

PA34 Seneca

L2P/S

PA34

1,300

1,300

II

PA38 Tomahawk

L1P/S

PA38

750

750

I

PA421000 Cheyenne 400

L2T/S

PAY4

2,500

2,000

II

PA42720 Cheyenne 3

L2T/S

PAY3

2,400

2,000

II

PA44 Seminole, Turbo Seminole

L2P/S

PA44

1,100

1,000

II

PA46 310P/350P Malibu, Malibu
Mirage

L1P/S

PA46

1,000

1,000

I

PA46500TP Malibu

L1T/S

P46T

1,500

1,500

I

PA60 Aerostar

L2P/S

AEST

1,500

1,500

II

S1 Special

L1P/S

PTS1

1,500

1,500

I

S2 Special

L1P/S

PTS2

1,500

1,500

I

S111 Super Stinker

L1P/Lt

PTSS

S12 Macho Stinker

L1P/L

PTMS

500 Shrike Commander

L2P/S

AC50

1,340

1,500

II

690 Turbo Commander

L2T/S

AC90

2,500

2,500

II

695 Jetprop Commander

L2T/S

AC95

2,500

2,500

II

B1 Lancer

L4J/H

B1

3,000

5,000

III

L2T/S+

SF34

2,000

2,000

III

S61 Sea King

H2T/L

S61

1,500

1,500

I

S64 Skycrane

H2T/L

S64

1,300

1,300

I

S65 Sea Stallion

H2T/L

H53

1,500

1,500

I

S70 Black Hawk

H2T/S+

H60

2,250

2,000

I

S76

H2T/S

S76

1,300

1,300

I

PITTS

ROCKWELL

SAAB-FAIRCHILD
SF340
SIKORSKY

APPENDIX C

Three-Letter Identiﬁers
ICAO Code

IATA Code

City

Country

Airport

AMML
ASSY
BIKF
BIRK
CYEG
CYHZ
CYMX
CYQM
CYQX
CYWG
CYYC
CYYT
CYYZ
DNMM

MEL
SYD
KEF
REK
YEG
YHZ
YMX
YQM
YQX
YWG
YYC
YYT
YYZ
LOS

Melbourne
Sydney
Keflavik
Reykjavik
Edmonton
Halifax
Montreal
Moncton
Gander
Winnipeg
Calgary
St. John’s
Toronto
Lagos Nigeria

Australia
Australia
Iceland
Iceland
Canada (Alberta)
Canada (Nova Scotia)
Canada (Quebec)
Canada (New Brunswick)
Canada (Newfoundland)
Canada (Manitoba)
Canada (Alberta)
Canada (Newfoundland)
Canada (Ontario)
Murtalla Muhammed

Tullamarine International
Kingsford Smith International

EBBR
EDDF
EDDI
EFHF
EFHK
EGAA
EGCC
EGGW
EGKK
EGLL
EGPF
EGSS
EHAM
EIDW
EINN
EKCH
ENGM
EPWA
FAJS
HECA
KABQ
KACY
KATL
KAUS
KBDL
KBNA
KBOI
KBOS
KBUF
KBWI

BRU
FRA
THF
HEM
HEL
BFS
MAN
LTN
LGW
LHR
GLA
STN
AMS
DUB
SNN
CPH
GEN
WAW
JNB
CAI
ABQ
AIY
ATL
AUS
BDL
BNA
BOI
BOS
BUF
BWI

Brussels
Frankfurt
Berlin
Helsinki
Helsinki
Belfast
Manchester
London
London
London
Glasgow
London
Amsterdam
Dublin
Shannon
Copenhagen
Oslo
Warsaw
Johannesburg
Cairo
Albuquerque
Atlantic City
Atlanta
Austin
Windsor Locks
Nashville
Boise
Boston
Buffalo
Baltimore

Belgium
Germany
Germany
Finland
Finland
North Ireland
England
England
England
England
Scotland
England
Netherlands
Ireland
Ireland
Denmark
Norway
Poland
South Africa
Egypt
USA (New Mexico)
USA (New Jersey)
USA (Georgia)
USA (Texas)
USA (Connecticut)
USA (Tennessee)
USA (Idaho)
USA (Massachusetts)
USA (New York)
USA (Maryland)

International
International
Mirabel International
International
International
International
Lester B. Pearson
Murtalla Muhammed
International
National
Rhein Main
Tempelhof
Malmi
Vantaa
International /Aldergrove
International
Luton
Gatwick
Heathrow
International
Stansted
Schiphol

Kastrup
Gardermoen
Warsaw Frederic Chopin
Jan Smuts International
International
International
Bader Field
Hartsfield International
Bergstrom International
Bradley International
Metropolitan
Air Terminal
Logan International
International
Washington International

600 / APPENDIX C
ICAO Code

IATA Code

City

Country

Airport

KCLE
KCLT
KCMH
KCMI
KCOS
KCVG

CLE
CLT
CMH
CMI
COS
CVG

Cleveland
Charlotte
Columbus
Champaign
Colorado Springs
Cincinnati

USA (Ohio)
USA (North Carolina)
USA (Ohio)
USA (Illinois)
USA (Colorado)
USA (Kentucky)

Hopkins International
Douglas Municipal
Port Columbus International
University of Illinois Willard
Peterson Field
Cincinnati/Northern
Kentucky International

KDAB
KDAL
KDAY
KDCA
KDEN
KDFW
KDSM
KDTW
KEWR
KFAT
KGFK
KGRR
KGTF
KHOU
KHPN
KIAD
KIAH
KICT
KIND
KJAX
KJFK
KLAF
KLAN
KLAS
KLAX
KMCI
KMDT
KMDW
KMEM
KMIA
KMKE
KMSN
KMSP
KMSY
KMYR
KNHK
KNKT
KNKX
KNQX
KNZY
KOAK
KOKC
KOMA
KONT
KORD
KMCO
KPHL
KPHX
KPIT

DAB
DAL
DAY
DCA
DEN
DFW
DSM
DTW
EWR
FAT
GFK
GRR
GTF
HOU
HPN
IAD
IAH
ICT
IND
JAX
JFK
LAF
LAN
LAS
LAX
MCI
MDT
MDW
MEM
MIA
MKE
MSN
MSP
MSY
MYR

Daytona Beach
Dallas
Dayton
Washington
Denver
Dallas–Fort Worth
Des Moines
Detroit
Newark
Fresno
Grand Forks
Grand Rapids
Great Falls
Houston
White Plains
Washington
Houston
Wichita
Indianapolis
Jacksonville
New York
Lafayette
Lansing
Las Vegas
Los Angeles
Kansas City
Harrisburg
Chicago
Memphis
Miami
Milwaukee
Madison
Minneapolis
New Orleans
Myrtle Beach
Patuxent River
Cherry Point
Miramar
Key West
San Diego
Oakland
Oklahoma City
Omaha
Ontario
Chicago
Orlando
Philadelphia
Phoenix
Pittsburgh

USA (Florida)
USA (Texas)
USA (Ohio)
USA (D.C.)
USA (Colorado)
USA (Texas)
USA (Iowa)
USA (Michigan)
USA (New Jersey)
USA (California)
USA (North Dakota)
USA (Michigan)
USA (Montana)
USA (Texas)
USA (New York)
USA (D.C.)
USA (Texas)
USA (Kansas)
USA (Indiana)
USA (Florida)
USA (New York)
USA (Indiana)
USA (Michigan)
USA (Nevada)
USA (California)
USA (Missouri)
USA (Pennsylvania)
USA (Illinois)
USA (Tennessee)
USA (Florida)
USA (Wisconsin)
USA (Wisconsin)
USA (Minnesota)
USA (Louisiana)
USA (South Carolina)
USA (Maryland)
USA (North Carolina)
USA (California)
USA (Florida)
USA (California)
USA (California)
USA (Oklahoma)
USA (Nebraska)
USA (California)
USA (Illinois)
USA (Florida)
USA (Pennsylvania)
USA (Arizona)
USA (Pennsylvania)

OAK
OKC
OMA
ONT
ORD
MCO
PHL
PHX
PIT

Love Field
James M. Cox
Ronald Reagan
Stapleton International
International
Metropolitan
International
Air Terminal
Country Cascade
International
William P. Hobby
Westchester County
Dulles International
Intercontinental
Mid-Continent
International
International
John F. Kennedy
Purdue University
Capital City
McCarran International
International
International
International
Midway
International
International
General Mitchell
Truax Field
St. Paul International
International
Mil. (Myrtle Beach)
Trapnell Field
Cunningham Field
Mitcher Field
Boca Chica Field
North Island NAS
International
Will Rogers World
Eppley Airfield
International
O’Hare
International
International
Sky Harbor International
Greater Pittsburgh

Three-Letter Identiﬁers

/

601

ICAO Code

IATA Code

City

Country

Airport

KRDU
KSAN
KSAT
KSEA
KSFO
KSLC
KSTL
KTEB
KTPA
KTUL
KTUS
KTYS
LEBL
LEMD
LFPB
LFPG
LEPO
LGAT
LHBP
LIRA
LIRF
LLJR
LSZH
MGGT
MHTG
MKJP

RDU
SAN
SAT
SEA
SFO
SLC
STL
TEB
TPA
TUL
TUS
TYS
BCN
MAD
LBG
CDG
ORY
ATH
BUD
CIA
FCO
JRS
ZRH
GUA
TGU
KIN

Raleigh-Durham
San Diego
San Antonio
Seattle
San Francisco
Salt Lake City
St. Louis
Teterboro
Tampa
Tulsa
Tucson
Knoxville
Barcelona
Madrid
Paris
Paris
Paris
Athens
Budapest
Rome
Rome
Jerusalem
Zurich
Guatemala City
Tegucigalpa
Kingston

USA (North Carolina)
USA (California)
USA (Texas)
USA (Washington)
USA (California)
USA (Utah)
USA (Missouri)
USA (New Jersey)
USA (Florida)
USA (Oklahoma)
USA (Arizona)
USA (Tennessee)
Spain
Spain
France
France
France
Greece
Hungary
Italy
Italy
Israel
Switzerland
Guatemala
Honduras
Jamaica

International
Lindbergh International
International
Tacoma International
International
International
Lambert-St. Louis International

MKJS
MMAA

MBJ
ACA

Montego Bay
Acapulco

Jamaica
Mexico

MMCS

CJS

Ciudad Juarez

Mexico

MMCZ
MMMX
MMMY
MMTJ
MNMG
MPTO
MROC

CZM
MEX
MTY
TIJ
MGA
PTY
SJO

Cozumel
Mexico City
Monterrey
Tijuana
Managua
Panama City
San Jose

Mexico
Mexico
Mexico
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Costa Rica

MTPP
MUHA
MYGF
MYNN
NSTU
NZCH
NZWN
OBBI
OEDR
OEJN
OERK
OIII
OJAI
OKBK
OLBA
OMAA

PAP
HAV
FPO
NAS
PPG
CHC
WLG
BAH
DHA
JED
RUH
THR
AMM
KWI
BEY
AUH

Port-au-Prince
Havana
Freeport
Nassau
Pago Pago
Christchurch
Wellington
Bahrain
Dhahran
Jeddah
Riyadh
Teheran
Amman
Kuwait
Beirut
Abu Dhabi

Haiti
Cuba
Bahamas
Bahamas
Samoa
New Zealand
New Zealand
Bahrain
Saudi Arabia
Saudi Arabia
Saudi Arabia
Iran
Jordan
Kuwait
Lebanon
United Arab Emirates

International
International
International
Mcgee Tyson
Barajas
Le Bourget
Charles De Gaulle
Orly
Hellinikon International
Ferihegy
Ciampino
Fiumicino
Atarot
Kloten
La Aurora
Toncontin International
Norman Manley
International
Sangster International
General Juan N. Alvarez
International
Abraham Gonzalez
International
International
Benito Juarez
General M. Escobedo
General A.L. Rodriguez
Augusto C. Sandino
Tocumen International
Juan Santamaria
International
Jose Marti International
International
International
International (Tutuila Island)
Grantley Adams
International
Bahrain International
International
King Abdul Aziz
King Khaled International
Mehrabad International
Queen Alia
International
International
International

602 / APPENDIX C
ICAO Code

IATA Code

City

Country

Airport

OPKC
ORBI
OSDI
PAFA
PANC
PGSN
PHNL
RCTB
RJAA
RJNN
RJTT
RKSS
RPMM
SABE
SBBR
SBRJ
SCEL

KHI
BGW
DAM
FAI
ANC
SPN
HNL
TPE
NRT
NGO
HND
SEL
MNL
AEP
BSB
SDU
SCL

Karachi
Baghdad
Damascus
Fairbanks
Anchorage
Saipan
Honolulu
Taipei
Tokyo
Nagoya
Tokyo
Seoul
Manila
Buenos Aires
Brasilia
Rio De Janeiro
Santiago

Pakistan
Iraq
Syria
USA (Alaska)
USA (Alaska)
Mariana Islands
USA (Hawaii)
Taiwan
Japan
Japan
Japan
Korea
Philippines
Argentina
Brazil (Df)
Brazil (Rj)
Chile

SEQU
SGAS
SKBO
SLLP
SPIM
SUAA
SVMC
SVVA
TIST
TJSJ
UHWW
ULLI
UUWW
VABB

UIO
ASU
BOG
LPB
LIM
MVD
MAR
VLN
STT
SJU
VVO
LED
VKO
BOM

Quito
Asuncion
Bogota
La Paz
Lima
Montevideo
Maracaibo
Valencia
St. Thomas
San Juan
Vladivostok
St. Petersburg
Moscow
Bombay

Ecuador
Paraguay
Colombia
Bolivia
Peru
Uruguay
Venezuela
Venezuela
Virgin Islands (USA)
Puerto Rico
Russia
Russia
Russia
India

VHHH
VIDP
VTBD
VVTS
WSSS
ZBAA
ZKPY
ZSSS

HKG
DEL
BKK
SGN
SIN
BJS
FNJ
SHA

Hong Kong
Delhi
Bangkok
Ho Chi Minh City
Singapore
Beijing
Pyongyang
Shanghai

Hong Kong
India
Thailand
Viet Nam
Singapore
China
Korea (North)
China

Quaid-E-Azam International
Baghdad International Airport
International
International
International
Saipan International
International
Chiang Kai-Shek
Narita/New Tokyo Apt.
Komaki International
Haneda International
Seoul Gimpo International
Ninoy Aquino International
J. Newberry International
International
Santos Dumont
Comodoro Arturo Merino
Benítez International
Mariscal Sucre
Silvio Pettirossi
El Dorado
El Alto
Jorge Chavez International
Angel San Adami
La Chinita International
International
Cyril E. King
Luis Munoz Marin
Vladivostok International
Pulkovo International
Vnukovo International
Chhatrapati Shivaji
International
Kai Tak International
Indira Gandhi International
Don Muang International
Tansonnhat
Changi International
Capital
Sunan
Hongqiao

GLOSSARY
abbreviated IFR flight plans—an authorization by
ATC requiring pilots to submit only that
information needed for ATC. It includes only a
small portion of the usual IFR flight plan
information. In certain instances, this may be only
aircraft identification, locations, and pilot request.
Other information may be requested if needed by
ATC for separation/control purposes. It is frequently
used by aircraft that are airborne and desire an
instrument approach or by aircraft that are on the
ground and desire a climb to VFR on top.
abeam—an aircraft is abeam a fix, point, or object
when that fix, point, or object is approximately 900
to the right or left of the aircraft track. Abeam
indicates a general position rather than a precise
point.
above ground level (AGL)—the measured height of
an object above the terrain.
active control—when air traffic controllers issue
aircraft instructions to maintain appropriate
separation.
additional services—advisory information provided
by ATC that includes but is not limited to the
following: traffic advisories; vectors, when requested
by the pilot, to assist aircraft receiving traffic
advisories to avoid observed traffic; altitude
deviation information of 300 feet or more from an
assigned altitude as observed on a verified (reading
correctly) automatic altitude readout (mode C);
advisories that traffic is no longer a factor; weather
and chaff information; weather assistance; bird
activity information; and holding-pattern
surveillance.

ADS-Contract (ADS-C)—a version of ADS wherein
the ground-based computer sets up a contract with
the aircraft such that the aircraft will automatically
provide information obtained from its own onboard sensors, and pass this information to the
ground as required.
advanced technologies and oceanic procedures
(ATOPS)—a single, satellite-based, integrated oceanic
system installed at three oceanic Air Traffic Control
Centers (New York, Oakland, Anchorage) which
combine common procedures, training, and
maintenance and support functions.
Aeronautical Information Manual—a primary FAA
publication that instructs pilots about operating in
the National Airspace System of the United States. It
provides basic flight information, ATC procedures,
and general instructional information concerning
health, medical facts, factors affecting flight safety,
accident and hazard reporting, and types of
aeronautical charts and their use.
Air Commerce Act—legislation that created the
Aeronautics Branch of the Department of
Commerce, the first formal aviation regulatory
agency of the federal government. Signed into law
on May 20, 1926.
Air Coordinating Committee (ACC)—organization
established on March 27, 1945, by the federal
government to coordinate with the International
Civil Aviation Organization and make
recommendations on technical, economic, and
industrial matters relating to aviation.
air defense identification zone (ADIZ)—area of
airspace within which the identification, location,

604 / Glossary
and control of aircraft is required for U.S. national
security.
Air Navigation Conferences—conferences held by
the International Civil Aviation Organization at
which recommendations and changes to the ICAO
Annexes are made.
Air Navigation Development Board (ANDB)—
agency established in 1948 to oversee the
implementation of the U.S. air traffic control system
as described in the SC-31 report made by the Radio
Technical Commission for Aeronautics.
air route surveillance radar (ARSR)—air traffic
control radar primarily used to separate aircraft en
route between terminal areas. Air route surveillance
radar typically has a range of up to 250 nautical miles.
air route traffic control center (ARTCC)—an air
traffic control facility with a primary function of
providing separation to aircraft en route between
airports.
air route traffic controller—a controller who works
in an air route traffic control center (ARTCC).
Air Safety Board—agency established on June 23,
1938, as part of the Civil Aeronautics Act. The
board was established to investigate aviation
accidents and make safety recommendations.
air taxiing—used to describe a helicopter movement
conducted above the surface but normally not
above 100 feet AGL. The aircraft may proceed
either via hover taxi or flight at speeds more
than 20 knots.
air traffic control (ATC)—a service provided by the
appropriate authority to promote the safe, orderly,
and expeditious flow of air traffic.
Air Traffic Control Association (ATCA)—
association formed in the late 1950s to represent the
interests of air traffic controllers.
Air Traffic Control Handbook (FAAH 7110.65)—
the FAA publication that delineates the procedures
to be used by FAA air traffic controllers when
performing their duties.
air traffic control radar beacon system
(ATCRBS)—a radar identification system composed
of a ground-based interrogator and an airborne
transponder that provides rapid and positive radar
identification of an aircraft.
Air Traffic Control System Command Center
(ATCSCC)—an Air Traffic Operations Service
facility consisting of four operational units. Central
Flow Control Function (CFCF) is responsible for the
coordination and approval of all major intercenter

flow control restrictions on a system basis in order
to obtain maximum utilization of the airspace.
Central Altitude Reservation Function (CARF) is
responsible for coordinating, planning, and
approving special user requirements under the
Altitude Reservation (ALTRV) concept. Airport
Reservation Office (ARO) is responsible for
approving IFR flights at designated high-densitytraffic airports (John F. Kennedy, LaGuardia,
O’Hare, and Ronald Reagan) during specified
hours. ATC Contingency Command Post is a facility
that enables the FAA to manage the ATC system
when significant portions of the system’s capabilities
have been lost or are threatened.
air traffic control system command center—the air
traffic tactical operations facility responsible for
monitoring and managing the flow of air traffic
throughout the NAS, producing a safe, orderly,
and expeditious flow of traffic while minimizing
delays.
air traffic control tower (ATCT)—an air traffic
control facility with a primary function of providing
runway separation for aircraft landing or departing
from the primary airport.
air traffic management (ATM)—a service provided
by ground-based controllers who direct aircraft on
the ground and in the air.
Air Traffic Selection and Training (AT-SAT)—the
Federal Aviation Administration’s computerized
selection test for air traffic control specialists.
airborne delay—amount of delay to be encountered
in airborne holding.
aircraft category—a grouping of aircraft based on
1.3 times the aircraft’s stall speed while in a landing
configuration at maximum gross landing weight.
Aircraft category is the primary determinant of
instrument approach minima that are used by the
pilot of that aircraft.
The aircraft categories are as follows:
Category A—Speed less than 91 knots.
Category B—Speed 91 knots or greater but less
than 121 knots.
Category C—Speed 121 knots or greater but less
than 141 knots.
Category D—Speed 141 knots or greater but less
than 166 knots.
Category E—Speed 166 knots or more.
aircraft class—categorization used to determine the
wake turbulence criteria that should be applied to
aircraft.

Glossary
Aircraft class is based on maximum certificated
takeoff weight. Aircraft classes are as follows:
Small—Aircraft weighing 41,000 pounds or less.
Large—Aircraft weighing more than 41,000
pounds up to and including 255,000 pounds.
Heavy—Aircraft weighing more than 255,000
pounds.
aircraft group—a performance group based upon an
aircraft’s landing characteristics.
aircraft list and plans display—a view available with
URET that lists aircraft currently in or predicted to be
in a particular sector’s airspace. The view contains
textual flight data information in line format and may
be sorted into various orders based on the specific
needs of the sector team.
aircraft situation display (ASD)—a computer system
that receives radar track data from all twenty
continental United States ARTCCs, organizes this
data into a mosaic display, and presents it on a
computer screen.
Airline Deregulation Act—a U.S. law signed in 1978
that removed federal government control over fares,
routes and market entry of new airlines.
Airmail Act of 1925—legislation authorizing the
postmaster general to contract with private
individuals and corporations for the purpose of
transporting airmail. Also known as the Kelly
Airmail Act. Signed into law on February 2, 1925.
AIRMET—in-flight weather advisories issued only
to amend the area forecast concerning weather
phenomena that are of operational interest to all
aircraft and potentially hazardous to aircraft having
limited capability because of lack of equipment,
instrumentation, or pilot qualifications. AIRMETs
concern weather of less severity than that covered
by SIGMETs or Convective SIGMETs. AIRMETs
cover moderate icing, moderate turbulence,
sustained winds of 30 knots or more at the surface,
widespread areas of ceilings less than 1,000 feet
and/or visibility less than 3 miles, and extensive
mountain obscurement. (See SIGMET, Convective
SIGMET.)
airport acceptance rate (AAR)—a dynamic input
parameter specifying the number of arriving aircraft
that an airport or airspace can accept from the
ARTCC per hour. The AAR is used to calculate the
desired interval between successive arrival aircraft.
airport advisory areas—the area on which a flight
service station is located within 10 miles of an
airport lacking a control tower. The flight service

/

605

station provides airport advisory service within this
area.
airport advisory service—a service, provided by
flight service stations, that consists of airport
conditions, known traffic within the area, and
weather information.
airport boundary lighting—steady-burning 40-watt
white lights placed on wooden stakes every 300 feet
around the perimeter of an airport.
Airport Facility Directory—a publication of the
Federal Aviation Administration that contains all
pertinent operational information about U.S.
airports. This information includes air traffic control
facilities, communications frequencies, airport data,
and special notices and procedures in effect.
airport movement areas—those portions of the
airport that come under the jurisdiction of air traffic
control.
airport radar service area (ARSA)—regulatory
airspace surrounding certain designated airports
where air traffic control provides full-time vectoring
and sequencing for both IFR and VFR aircraft.
airport surface detection equipment (ASDE)—radar
equipment specifically designed to detect moving
objects on the airport surface.
airport surveillance radar (ASR)—approach control
radar used to separate aircraft within the immediate
vicinity of an airport. Airport surveillance radar
normally has a maximum range of 60 nautical
miles.
airport surveillance radar (ASR) approach—an
instrument approach procedure in which the air
traffic controller uses airport surveillance radar to
maintain the aircraft on the runway centerline while
the pilot initiates a descent.
airspeed indicator—a cockpit instrument that
indicates the aircraft’s speed relative to its
surrounding air mass.
airway—a formally designated control area, the
centerline of which is defined by radio navigation aids.
airway facility technicians—FAA employees
responsible for the installation, operation, and
maintenance of electronic navigation aids and air
traffic control equipment.
airway traffic control centers (ATCCs)—
predecessors of today’s air route traffic control
centers.
airway traffic control stations (ATCSs)—
predecessors of today’s air route traffic control
centers.

606 / Glossary
airway traffic control units (ATCUs)—predecessors
of today’s air route traffic control centers.
Airways Modernization Board (AMB)—
independent agency formed in 1957 to coordinate
civilian-military aviation electronics research and
development. The AMB conducted research on air
traffic control computers, transponders, and
advanced radar equipment at its research and
development facilities near Atlantic City, New
Jersey. This complex later became the FAA’s
National Aviation Facilities Experimental Center
(NAFEC).
alert areas—nonrestricted airspace in which a high
volume of pilot training activity may be taking
place.
alert notice (ALNOT)—a request for an extensive
communications search for an overdue, unreported,
or missing aircraft.
alphanumeric display—letters and numerals used to
show identification, altitude, beacon code, and other
information concerning a target on a radar display.
altimeter—the aircraft instrument that indicates
altitude above a given datum.
altitude filtering—a means by which the controller
can control which aircraft are displayed on the
radar, based on transmitted altitude.
amendment (AM)—a type of message used to
electronically change aircraft flight plan
information.
Annexes—see ICAO Annexes.
anticipated separation—a procedure whereby the
controller issues instructions to two or more aircraft
based on the presumption that they will remain
separated.
approach and departure control—a terminal ATC
facility that provides radar separation service in a
terminal area.
approach clearance—authorization by ATC for a
pilot to conduct an instrument approach for which
a clearance and other pertinent information is
provided in the approach clearance when required.
approach control service—air traffic control service
provided by an approach control facility for arriving
and departing VFR/IFR aircraft and, on occasion, en
route aircraft.
approach gate—an imaginary point used as the
basis for vectoring aircraft to the final approach
course. The approach gate is located 1 mile outside
the final approach fix or 5 nautical miles from the
end of the runway, whichever distance is greater.

approach lighting system (ALS)—an airport lighting
facility that provides visual guidance to landing
aircraft by radiating light beams in a directional
pattern by which the pilot aligns the aircraft with the
extended centerline of the runway on the final
approach for landing. Capacitor discharge sequential
flashing lights/sequenced flashing lights may be
installed in conjunction with the ALS at some airports.
Types of approach lighting systems are as follows:
1. ALSF-1—approach lighting system with
sequenced flashing lights in ILS Category I
configuration.
2. ALSF-2—approach lighting system with
sequenced flashing lights in ILS Category II
configuration. The ALSF-2 may operate as an
SSALR when weather conditions permit.
3. SSALF—simplified short approach lighting
system with sequenced flashing lights.
4. SSALR—simplified short approach lighting
system with runway alignment indicator lights.
5. MALSF—medium-intensity approach lighting
system with sequenced flashing lights.
6. MALSR—medium-intensity approach lighting
system with runway alignment indicator lights.
7. LDIN—lead in light system: Consists of one
or more series of flashing lights installed at
or near ground level that provides positive
visual guidance along an approach path, either
curving or straight, where special problems exist
with hazardous terrain, obstructions, or noise
abatement procedures.
8. RAIL—runway alignment indicator lights
(sequenced flashing lights that are installed only
in combination with other light systems).
9. ODALS—omnidirectional approach lighting
system that consists of seven omnidirectional
flashing lights located in the approach area of
a nonprecision runway. Five lights are located
on the runway centerline extended with the first
light located 300 feet from the threshold and
extending at equal intervals up to 1,500 feet from
the threshold. The other two lights are located,
one on each side of the runway threshold, at a
lateral distance of 40 feet from the runway edge,
or 75 feet from the runway edge when installed
on a runway equipped with a VASI.
10. runway lights/runway edge lights—lights having
a prescribed angle of emission used to define
the lateral limits of a runway. Runway lights are
uniformly spaced at intervals of approximately
200 feet, and the intensity may be controlled or
preset.

Glossary
11. touchdown zone lighting—two rows of
transverse light bars located symmetrically
about the runway centerline typically at
100-foot intervals. The basic system extends
3,000 feet along the runway.
12. runway centerline lighting—flush centerline
lights spaced at 50-foot intervals beginning
75 feet from the landing threshold and
extending to within 75 feet of the opposite
end of the runway.
13. threshold lights—fixed green lights arranged
symmetrically left and right of the runway
centerline, identifying the runway threshold.
14. runway end identifier lights (REILs)—two
synchronized flashing lights, one on each side of
the runway threshold, which provide rapid and
positive identification of the approach end of a
particular runway.
15. visual approach slope indicator (VASI)—an
airport lighting facility providing vertical visual
approach slope guidance to aircraft during
approach to landing by radiating a directional
pattern of high-intensity red and white focused
light beams that indicate to pilots that they are
“on path” if they see red/white, “above path” if
white/white, and “below path” if red/red. Some
airports serving large aircraft have three-bar
VASIs that provide two visual glide paths to the
same runway.
approach plates—a slang term used to describe
instrument approach procedure charts.
approval request (APPREQ)—a request by a
controller to deviate from the procedures delineated
in a facility directive or a letter of agreement.
area control center (ACC)—an ICAO term for an air
traffic control facility primarily responsible for ATC
services being provided to IFR aircraft during the en
route phase of flight. The U.S. equivalent facility is
an air route traffic control center (ARTCC).
area high routes—direct routes between two points
in space that exist at or above flight level 180.
area low routes—direct routes between two points
in space that exist below flight level 180.
area navigation (RNAV)—a method of navigation
that permits aircraft operation on any desired
course within the coverage of station-referenced
navigation signals or within the limits of a selfcontained system capability. Random area
navigation routes are direct routes, based on area
navigation capability, between waypoints defined by
latitude/longitude coordinates, degree/distance fixes,

/

607

or offsets from published or established routes/
airways at a specified distance and direction. The
major types of equipment are as follows:
1. VORTAC-referenced or course-line computer
(CLC) systems, which account for the greatest
number of RNAV units in use. To function,
the CLC must be within the service range of a
VORTAC.
2. OMEGA/VLF, although two separate systems,
can be considered as one operationally. A longrange navigation system based on very low
frequency radio signals transmitted from a total
of seventeen stations worldwide.
3. Inertial (INS) systems, which are totally selfcontained and require no information from
external references. They provide aircraft
position and navigation information in response
to signals resulting from inertial effects on
components within the system.
4. MLS area navigation (MLS/RNAV), which
provides area navigation with reference to an
MLS ground facility.
5. LORAN-C is a long-range radio navigation
system that uses ground waves transmitted
at low frequency to provide user position
information at ranges of up to 600 to 1,200
nautical miles at both en route and approach
altitudes. The usable signal coverage areas are
determined by the signal-to-noise ratio, the
envelope-to-cycle difference, and the geometric
relationship between the positions of the user
and the transmitting stations.
6. GPS is a space-based radio positioning,
navigation, and time-transfer system. The
system provides highly accurate position
and velocity information and precise time
on a continuous global basis to an unlimited
number of properly equipped users. The
system is unaffected by weather and provides a
worldwide common grid reference system.
area routes—direct routes between two points in
space.
arrival gates—intersections or areas used by
approach control facilities primarily as inbound
fixes into their areas.
arrival sequencing program (ASP)—the automated
program designed to assist in sequencing aircraft
destined for the same airport.
artificial horizon—an outdated but still used term
used to describe an attitude indicator.

608 / Glossary
ARTS-II—a programmable, nontracking, computeraided display subsystem capable of modular
expansion. ARTS-II systems provide a level of
automated air traffic control capability at terminals
having low to medium activity. Flight identification
and altitude may be associated with the display of
secondary radar targets. The system has the
capability of communicating with ARTCCs and
other ARTS-II, -IIA, -III, and -IIIA facilities.
ARTS-IIA—a programmable, radar-tracking
computer subsystem capable of modular
expansion. The ARTS-IIA detects, tracks, and
predicts secondary radar targets. The targets are
displayed by means of computer-generated
symbols, ground speed, and flight plan data.
Although it does not track primary radar targets,
they are displayed coincident with the secondary
radar as well as the symbols and alphanumerics.
The system has the capability of communicating
with ARTCCs and other ARTS-II, -IIA, -III,
and -IIIA facilities.
ARTS-III—the beacon tracking level (BTL) of the
modular programmable automated radar terminal
system in use at medium- to high-activity terminals.
ARTS-III detects, tracks, and predicts secondary
radar-derived aircraft targets. These are displayed
by means of computer-generated symbols and
alphanumeric characters depicting flight
identification, aircraft altitude, ground speed, and
flight plan data. Although it does not track primary
targets, they are displayed coincident with the
secondary radar as well as the symbols and
alphanumerics. The system has the capability of
communicating with ARTCCs and other ARTS-III
facilities.
ARTS-IIIA—the radar tracking and beacon tracking
level (RT and BTL) of the modular, programmable,
automated radar terminal system. ARTS-IIIA
detects, tracks, and predicts primary as well as
secondary radar-derived aircraft targets. This more
sophisticated computer-driven system upgrades the
existing ARTS-III system by providing improved
tracking, continuous data recording, and fail-safe
capabilities.
associated track—aircraft with flight plan
information that has been derived from the FDP
system in the ARTCC or from information entered
by the controller.
association checking—the correlation of an aircraft’s
actual three-dimensional position with its predicted
position.

attitude indicator—the instrument on the aircraft
panel that indicates the aircraft’s flight attitude.
autoland approach—a precision instrument
approach to touchdown and, in some cases, through
the landing rollout. An autoland approach is
performed by the aircraft autopilot which is
receiving position information and/or steering
commands from onboard navigation equipment.
automated flight service station (AFSS)—the final
result of the Federal Aviation Administration’s flight
service station consolidation project: sixty-one
automated flight service stations with advanced
computer equipment will replace over 300 laborintensive flight service stations.
automated handoff—a handoff using radar data
processing computer equipment.
automated radar terminal system (ARTS)—a generic
term that describes two computer beacon processing
systems used in conjunction with airport
surveillance radar. The two ARTS systems in use by
the FAA are ARTS-II, a beacon tracking level system
primarily used at low- or medium-activity airports,
and ARTS-III, a radar and beacon tracking level
system used at high-activity airports.
automatic dependent surveillance (ADS)—a
surveillance technique in which aircraft automatically
provide, via a data link, data derived from on-board
navigation and position fixing systems, including
aircraft identification, four dimensional position and
additional data as appropriate.
automatic direction finder (ADF)—the airborne
component used by pilots to navigate using
nondirectional beacons.
Automatic Terminal Information Service (ATIS)—
the continuous broadcast of recorded noncontrol
information in selected terminal areas. Its purpose is
to improve controller effectiveness and to relieve
frequency congestion by automating the repetitive
transmission of essential but routine information.
autorotation—a flight condition in which a helicopter
makes a nonpowered, controlled descent to landing.
aviation academics—that portion of the training at
the FAA Academy that concentrates on general
aviation and ATC knowledge.
Aviation Noise Abatement Policy—the FAA’s official
policy on mitigating aircraft noise.
backup channel—a slang term used to describe the
backup radar system used at ARTCCs.
beacon data acquisition system (BDAS)—the
component of an ARTS radar system that interprets

Glossary
transponder replies, correlates this information with
those targets detected by the primary radar system,
and then sends this information in a digital format
to the data processing system.
beacon slash—the radar display produced by a
transponder.
beacon tracking level (BTL)—a radar processing
system that can track only transponder-equipped
aircraft.
bin—a 2-mile square that contains the maximum
height of any obstruction within that area.
blind speed—the radial velocity at which a target
will be removed from the radar display by moving
target indicator equipment.
blip—slang term for target, echo, or radar return.
boresight—the angular width of the transmission
from a primary radar antenna.
bright radar indicator tower equipment (BRITE)—a
radar display system primarily designed to be used
in high-ambient-light environments such as control
towers.
Bureau of Air Commerce—one of the first aviation
specific regulatory agencies in the federal
government.
calm wind runway—the runway designated in
facility directives to be used whenever the wind is
less than 5 knots.
ceiliometer—an optical or laser-based device that
measures the height of the overlying cloud levels.
center radar ARTS presentation (CENRAP)—a
computer program developed to provide a backup
system for airport surveillance radar in the event of
a failure or malfunction. The program uses air route
traffic control center radar for the processing and
presentation of data on the ARTS-IIA or -IIIA
displays.
central computer complex (CCC)—the generic term
used to describe the computers that operate both the
flight data and radar processing systems at an
ARTCC. Also known as the host computer.
Central Flow Control Facility (CFCF)—the original
name of what is now known as the Air Traffic
Control System Command Center.
chain—one set of LORAN-C transmitting stations.
challenge pulse—the first electronic pulse sent by a
ground-based interrogation system such as the
ATCRBS.
changeover point (COP)—the point on an airway
where the pilot ceases to navigate from one

/

609

navigation aid and begins to navigate toward the
next. Unless otherwise specified, this point is
normally halfway between the two navigation aids.
Chief Operating Officer (COO)—the title given to
the head of FAA’s air traffic control operations.
circular polarization (CP)—a primary radar mode of
operation used in an attempt to remove
symmetrically shaped objects (such as precipitation)
from the radar display.
Civil Aeronautical Medical Institute (CAMI)—the
medical branch of the Federal Aviation
Administration based at the Aeronautical Center in
Oklahoma City.
Civil Aeronautics Administration (CAA)—agency
created in 1940 when the president restructured the
Civil Aeronautics Authority. Under this
reorganization, the Office of the Administrator of
the Civil Aeronautics Authority was placed under
the auspices of the Department of Commerce and
renamed the Civil Aeronautics Administration.
Civil Aeronautics Authority (CAA)—agency created
on June 23, 1938, when Congress passed the Civil
Aeronautics Act, which removed the Bureau of Air
Commerce from the Department of Commerce and
created the Civil Aeronautics Authority. The CAA
became the only independent authority established
in the U.S. government at that time.
Civil Aeronautics Board (CAB)—agency created in
1940 when the president restructured the Civil
Aeronautics Authority. Under this reorganization,
the functions of the Air Safety Board and the fiveperson Civil Aeronautics Authority were combined
into a new organization known as the Civil
Aeronautics Board.
civil air regulations (CARs)—the predecessors of
today’s Federal Aviation Regulations (FARs).
clear zone—an area designated to remain clear of
obstacles, usually located near the end of a runway.
clearance delivery controller—the controller in a
tower whose responsibility is to issue initial IFR
clearances to aircraft.
clearance delivery—an operating position in the
control tower responsible for issuing clearances to
pilots.
Cleared—word used to convey air traffic control
permission.
cleared as filed (CAF)—means the aircraft is cleared
to proceed in accordance with the route of flight
filed in the flight plan. This clearance does not
include the altitude, SID, or SID transition.

610 / Glossary
clutter map—a stored file of nonmoving objects that
consistently provide radar returns.
coast—a condition that occurs when a computerized
radar system is tracking a target but radar contact is
temporarily lost. In coast mode, the computer
predicts the aircraft’s location and displays it on the
radar scope.
coast list—a list of aircraft whose radar return is
temporarily interrupted.
collaborative air traffic management (CATM)—an
effort by the FAA to develop an ATC system that
focuses on delivering services to accommodate flight
operator preferences to the maximum extent
possible.
collaborative decision making (CDM)—a joint
government/industry initiative aimed at improving
air traffic management through increased
information exchange among the various parties in
the aviation community.
Collegiate Training Initiative (CTI)—an FAA
program to create a program designed to establish
partnerships with educational institutions and to
broaden employment opportunities in the aviation
industry.
colored airways—the system of NDB-based airways
that used to exist across the United States.
combined center—RAPCON (CERAP)—an air
traffic facility that combines the functions of an
ARTCC and a radar approach control facility.
commercial off the shelf (COTS)—hardware and
software that can be commonly purchased on the
public market and used by the FAA with little or no
special adaptation.
common ARTS—an FAA radar system capable of
interfacing multiple radar sensors, facilities and
towers into a system compatible with older ARTS II
and III systems.
common digitizer (CD)—a component of the
NAS-A radar system that converts both primary and
secondary radar information into a digital format,
readying it for transmission to the central computer
complex.
communication, navigation, surveillance (CNS)—a
term used to describe the components of the air
traffic control system.
compass deviation card—a card in the cockpit that
specifies the errors to be compensated for when
using the aircrafts magnetic compass.

compass locator—a nondirectional beacon (NDB)
that has been colocated with a marker beacon
transmitter.
composite route system—an organized oceanic
route structure incorporating reduced lateral
spacing between routes in which composite
separation is authorized.
composite separation—a method of separating
aircraft in a composite route system where, by
management of route and altitude assignments, a
combination of half the lateral minimum specified
for the area concerned and half the vertical
minimum is applied.
compulsory reporting points—reporting points that
must be reported to ATC. They are designated on
aeronautical charts by solid triangles or filed in a
flight plan as fixes selected to define direct routes.
These points are geographical locations that are
defined by navigation aids/fixes. Pilots should
discontinue position reporting over compulsory
reporting points when informed by ATC that their
aircraft is in “radar contact.”
computer display channel (CDC)—a component of
the NAS-A radar system that channels digitized
radar information from the central computer
complex to the individual plan view displays.
computer readout device (CRD)—a cathode ray
tube display located next to the plan view display at
an ARTCC controller’s workstation. This device can
be used to obtain or update flight plan information,
obtain weather information, communicate with
other controllers, receive generic ATC messages, and
display aircraft flight plan information, ATC system
status, or airport weather reports.
computer update equipment (CUE)—input/output
equipment found at an ARTCC workstation that
includes a computer readout device (CRD) and a
quick action keyboard (QAK).
Conflict Alert—a radar data processing program
used at both ARTS and NAS-A sites that alerts the
controllers whenever two participating aircraft are
predicted to approach each other with less than the
minimum separation.
Conflict Alert IFR/VFR Mode C Intruder—a radar
data processing program being installed at NAS-A
sites that will alert the controller whenever IFR and
VFR mode C –equipped aircraft are predicted to
approach each other with less than the minimum
separation.

Glossary
conflict probe—an FAA automation tool that can
detect future potential aircraft conflicts in real time.
conflict resolution—an advanced future software
function that will automatically provide the
controller with resolutions to conflicts between two
radar-tracked aircraft.
contact approach—an approach wherein an aircraft
on an IFR flight plan, having received the
appropriate clearance and operating clear of clouds
with at least 1-mile flight visibility and with a
reasonable expectation of continuing to the
destination airport under those conditions, may
deviate from an instrument approach procedure and
proceed visually to the destination airport. During a
contact approach, the pilot is responsible for
navigation and terrain avoidance, whereas the
controller is responsible for air traffic control
separation. A contact approach may be initiated
only by the pilot.
continuous wave (CW) radar—an early form of
radar that transmits constantly. Not used for air
traffic control.
control areas—areas within which some form of air
traffic control is provided.
control sector—an airspace area of defined
horizontal and vertical dimensions for which a
controller or group of controllers has air traffic
control responsibility normally within an air route
traffic control center or an approach control facility.
Sectors are established based on predominant traffic
flows, altitude strata, and controller workload. Pilot
communications during operations within a sector
are normally maintained on discrete frequencies
assigned to the sector. (See discrete frequency.)
control slash—a radar beacon slash representing the
actual position of the associated aircraft. Typically,
the control slash is the one closest to the
interrogating radar beacon site. When ARTCC
radar is operating in narrow band (digitized) mode,
the control slash is converted to a target symbol.
control tower—see air traffic control tower.
controlled airspace—airspace within which air
traffic control services will be provided. IFR flights
must obtain an air traffic control clearance; VFR
flights may be subject to either weather or air traffic
control restrictions.
controlled departure time (CDT)—a program
instituted by the Central Flow Control Facility to

/

611

delay the departure of an aircraft attempting to
depart toward a saturated airport.
controlled firing areas—an area where activities, if
not conducted in a controlled environment, could be
hazardous to aircraft. Controlled firing areas are not
charted on VFR or IFR charts because the
controlling agency suspends its activities whenever
nonparticipating aircraft approach the area.
controlled VFR (CVFR)—an ICAO-approved type
of flight in which the pilot must maintain VFR
conditions but the aircraft is separated as if it is IFR.
Controlled VFR is not used in the United States.
controller–pilot data link communications
(CPDLC)—a two-way digital VHF air/ground
communications system that conveys textual
air traffic control messages between controllers
and pilots.
convective SIGMET—a weather advisory
concerning convective weather significant to the
safety of all aircraft. Convective SIGMETs are
issued for tornadoes, lines of thunderstorms,
embedded thunderstorms of any intensity level,
areas of thunderstorms greater than or equal to VIP
level 4 with an area coverage of 4/10 (40 percent) or
more, and hail 3/4 inch or greater.
Convention on International Civil Aviation—the
international agreement that provided for the
creation of ICAO.
coordination—the process that occurs when two
controllers agree to a procedure or event when
separating aircraft.
coordinated universal time (UTC)—a standardized
time based on the current time at the prime
meridian. Formerly called Greenwich mean time.
course deviation indicator (CDI)—the device in an
aircraft that provides the pilot with off-course
indications.
course scalloping—a result of VOR or localizer
signal reflections. Course scalloping occurs when a
particular course or radial develops bends and
curves within it but is still navigable.
course-line computer (CLC)—the primary
component of VORTAC-based area navigation
systems. The course-line computer is the device that
calculates the aircraft’s current position, the position
of each waypoint, and the bearing and distance to
each waypoint.
critical area—the area immediately surrounding a
navigation transmitter (such as a localizer or glide

612 / Glossary
slope) that must be kept clear of potentially
reflective objects (such as vehicles, aircraft, or
equipment).
crosswind correction angle—the calculated angle
that must be applied to an aircraft’s heading to
counteract the effect of a crosswind.
crosswinds—the wind component measured in
knots at 90° to the longitudinal axis of the runway
or course of the aircraft.
cruise clearance—used in an ATC clearance to
authorize a pilot to conduct flight at any altitude
from the minimum IFR altitude up to and including
the altitude specified in the clearance.
data acquisition subsystem (DAS)—a peripheral
device of the ARTS radar processing system that
receives raw radar data from the primary surveillance
radar system in addition to beacon-derived
information obtained from the secondary surveillance
system. The DAS decodes this information, converts it
to a digital format, and channels it to the data
processing subsystem for further processing.
data block—an alphanumeric display on a radar
presentation that normally includes the aircraft’s
identity and altitude and may also include its
ground speed and destination airport.
data converter—a device that converts analog into
digital data for transmission.
data entry and display subsystem (DEDS)—device
used to display ARTS-derived information on a plan
position indicator; it can also be used by the
controller to input flight data into the computer. The
DEDS consists of two subsystems: the data display
and the data entry sets.
data entry sets (DES)—devices used to input flight
data into an ARTS radar computer system. The data
entry sets include an alphanumeric keyboard, a
quick look selector, and a slew entry device, which is
sometimes called a trackball.
data link—a digital communications system that
will be able to transmit data from the controller to
the aircraft and vice versa. This information could
include clearance and weather information,
control instructions, or pilot-controller
information requests. The first operational data
link system, called controller-pilot data link
communications (CPDLC) is being tested at the
Miami ARTCC.
data processing subsystem (DPS)—the heart of the
ARTS radar processing system. It is a high-speed,
digital computer that accepts information from

three sources—the data acquisition subsystem, the
flight data processing system, and the data entry
sets—correlates this information, and displays it to
the controller on the PPI in the form of
alphanumeric data blocks.
dead reckoning—the navigation of an airplane
solely by means of computations based on airspeed,
course, heading, wind direction, and speed,
groundspeed, and elapsed time.
decenter—the ability to offset the main bang off a
radar display.
decision height (DH)—the height at which, during a
precision approach, the pilot must decide whether
to continue the approach to land or to conduct a
missed approach.
defense visual flight rules (DVFR)—rules applicable
to VFR flights that will penetrate an air defense
identification zone (ADIZ).
defruiter—the electronic device used to remove
spurious transponder replies (known as fruit) from
radar displays.
Department of Transportation (DOT)—a cabinetlevel agency of the federal government within which
the Federal Aviation Administration is located.
departure control—a function of an approach
control facility providing air traffic control service
for departing IFR and, under certain conditions,
VFR aircraft.
departure delay program—a traffic metering
program used by the FAA to space departing aircraft.
departure gates—intersections or areas used
by departure control facilities primarily as
outbound fixes.
departure message—an automated message sent to
the FAA’s flight data processing computer advising
that an aircraft either has or will depart from the
airport at a specific time.
departure procedure (DP)—either a charted or
textual description of the route an aircraft on an
IFR flight plan must fly to transition from the
departure airport to the en route airway structure.
departure sequencing program (DSP)—a program
designed to assist in achieving a specified interval
over a common point for departures.
departure time—the time an aircraft becomes
airborne.
developmental controller—the classification of a
newly hired controller who has not yet become
certified as a full performance level (FPL) controller.

Glossary
deviation—departure from a current clearance, such
as an off course maneuver to avoid weather or
turbulence.
digital BRITE (D-BRITE)—an all-digital version of
the BRITE radar display system.
Direct—straight line flight between two navigational
aids, fixes, points, or any combination thereof.
direction finder—a radio receiver equipped with a
directional sensing antenna used to take bearings on
a radio transmitter.
Direct user access terminal—a service that provides
direct access to weather briefing, flight planning,
and flight plan filing information to allow pilots to
obtain a self-briefing and file a flight plan prior to
flying. The service is free to qualified pilots,
dispatchers, and other authorized users.
discrete code—as used in the air traffic control radar
beacon system (ATCRBS), any one of the 4,096
selectable mode 3/A aircraft transponder codes,
except those ending in zero zero; for example
discrete codes: 0010, 1201, 2317, 7777; nondiscrete
codes: 0100, 1200, 7700. Nondiscrete codes are
normally reserved for radar facilities that are not
equipped with discrete decoding capability and for
other purposes such as emergencies (7700) or VFR
aircraft (1200).
discrete frequency—a separate radio frequency for
use in direct pilot–controller communications in air
traffic control that reduces frequency congestion by
controlling the number of aircraft operating on a
particular frequency at one time. Discrete
frequencies are normally designated for each control
sector in en route/terminal ATC facilities. Discrete
frequencies are listed in the Airport/Facility
Directory and the DoD FLIP IFR En route
Supplement.
display system replacement—the FAA program to
replace older, analog, single color traffic displays
used in ARTCCs with modern, multi-color digital
displays.
distance measuring equipment (DME)—electronic
equipment, consisting of an interrogator and a
transponder, that permits the pilot to accurately
determine the aircraft’s distance from a ground
station. The ground-based DME transponder is
typically colocated with either a VOR or an ILS. A
precision version of DME is a functional
component of the microwave landing system.
divergence—the angular difference between two
routes or flight paths.

/

613

diverse vector area (DVA)—in a radar environment,
the area in which a prescribed departure route is not
required as the only suitable route to avoid
obstacles. The area in which random radar vectors
below the MVA/MIA, established in accordance
with the TERPS criteria for diverse departures
obstacles and terrain avoidance, may be issued to
departing aircraft.
domestic airspace—airspace that overlies the
continental land mass of the United States plus
Hawaii and U.S. possessions. Domestic airspace
extends to 12 miles offshore.
domestic reduced vertical separation minima
(DRVSM)—reduction of standard vertical
separation above FL 290 over the domestic United
States from 2,000' to 1,000'.
doppler effect—the change in the apparent
frequency of a wave as observer and source move
toward or away from each other.
Doppler radar—an outdated form of area
navigation that relies on the Doppler effect, or a
frequency shift of reflected radar transmissions,
to calculate the aircraft’s ground speed and true
course.
Doppler VOR (DVOR)—a VOR that operates
using completely different principles than a
conventional VOR, although this difference in
operation is transparent to the pilot. Doppler VOR
is less sensitive to reflections from buildings or
terrain than a conventional VOR transmitter.
double bloomer—slang term used in ATC to
describe a radar target transmitting an emergency
transponder code.
duplex communications—a radio communications
system wherein both parties can communicate with
one another, in both directions at the same time.
duplexer—a device that permits both the radar
transmitter and receiver to use the same antenna.
The duplexer ensures that the receiver is never on
during pulse transmissions because a high-energy
pulse would likely destroy the receiver. The duplexer
also switches the transmitter off during the time that
the receiver is listening for echos.
DVFR flight plan—a flight plan filed for a VFR
aircraft that intends to operate in airspace within
which the ready identification, location, and control
of aircraft are required in the interest of national
security.
echo—the reflection of radar energy from an object
such as an aircraft, vehicle, or terrain.

614 / Glossary
emergency locator transmitter (ELT)—a radio
transmitter attached to an aircraft that transmits a
continuous signal on 121.5 mHz and 243.0 mHz in
case of an accident. The ELT is a valuable tool when
searching for lost aircraft.
en route automated radar tracking system
(EARTS)—an automated radar and radar beacon
tracking system. Its functional capabilities and
design are essentially the same as the terminal
ARTS-IIIA system except for the EARTS’ capability
of employing both short-range (ASR) and longrange (ARSR) radars, use of full digital radar
displays, and fail-safe design.
en route automation modernization (ERAM)—an en
route automation modernization program that will
provide additional functions and improved
surveillance for controllers.
en route flight advisory service (EFAS)—a service of
selected flight service stations specifically designed
to provide timely weather information to pilots en
route to their destination.
en route metering (ERM)—a software program
resident on the ARTCC central computer complex
that is able to determine an airport’s acceptance rate
for a 15-minute interval and then match the
inbound flow of traffic to the calculated acceptance
rate by issuing crossing times over specified
navigational fixes known as metering fixes.
en route minimum safe altitude warning
(E-MSAW)—a function of the NAS-A en route
computer that aids controllers by alerting them
when a tracked aircraft is below or predicted by the
computer to go below a predetermined minimum
IFR altitude.
en route sector loading (ELOD)—a software
program, resident on the central computer complex,
that is able to calculate every sector’s current and
predicted traffic load and alert personnel at the
Central Flow Control Facility and at the traffic
management units in the ARTCC whenever it
predicts that a particular en route sector will
become saturated with traffic.
en route spacing program (ESP)—a program designed
to assist the exit sector in achieving the required intrail spacing.
Enhanced Conflict Alert—an enhanced version of the
current Conflict Alert software operational at ARTS
radar sites. Enhanced Conflict Alert will not have to
be desensitized near parallel approach corridors.
enhanced traffic management system (ETMS)—the
system used by FAA traffic management controllers

to predict, on national and local scales, traffic
surges, gaps, and volume based on current and
anticipated airborne aircraft.
equivalent visual approach—a future process that
will permit pilots flying in IMC to fly an approach
and land as if conducting a visual approach.
expect further clearance (EFC)—the time that the
pilot can expect to receive clearance beyond the
assigned clearance limit.
expected departure clearance time (EDCT)—the
runway release time assigned to an aircraft by the
controlled departure time software program used by
the Central Flow Control Facility.
extremely high frequency—the frequency band
between 30 gHz and 300 gHz.
facility directives (FD)—official documents that
clarify methods and procedures used by the
controllers within a particular air traffic control
facility.
facility rating—a certificate issued by the FAA when
a controller has become certified in every assigned
sector and has passed the appropriate written
examinations.
false courses—courses or radials resulting from
VOR or localizer signal reflections; these courses
cannot be used because of their extreme inaccuracy.
false glide paths—extraneous glide paths produced
by the glide slope transmitter. In every instance, the
false glide paths are elevated at a greater angle than
the desired glide path. There will never be a false
glide path below the desired glide path.
FDC NOTAM—a regulatory notice to airmen
issued by the Flight Data Center.
federal airways—see airway.
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)—the agency
of the Department of Transportation charged with
operating the civilian air traffic control system in the
United States.
Federal Aviation Agency (FAA)—the predecessor to
the Federal Aviation Administration. It ceased to
exist when the Department of Transportation was
formed in 1967.
Federal Communications Commission (FCC)—the
federal authority charged with allocating, monitoring,
and regulating radio communications systems.
feeder fix—the fix depicted on instrument approach
procedure charts that establishes the starting point
of the feeder route.
feeder route—a route depicted on instrument
approach procedure charts to designate routes for

Glossary
aircraft to proceed from the en route structure to
the initial approach fix (IAF).
feedhorn—the component of the rotating radar
antenna that directs the microwave radar energy
toward the reflecting antenna.
fields—as applied to flight data processing, the
individual components of a flight plan, such as
aircraft type, requested altitude, and so on.
field training program—air traffic control training
that a developmental controller receives at his or her
assigned air traffic control facility.
final approach fix (FAF)—the fix from which the
final approach segment of an instrument approach
begins. The final approach fix is identified on the
profile view of an instrument approach chart using
the letter X.
final approach segment—that segment of an
instrument approach procedure in which alignment
and descent for landing are accomplished.
final controller—a controller whose responsibility is
to sequence aircraft on the instrument approach.
final monitor aid (FMA)—a high-resolution color
display that is equipped with the controller alert
system hardware/software used in the precision
runway monitor (PRM) system. The display
includes alert algorithms providing the target
predictors, a color change alert when a target
penetrates or is predicted to penetrate the no
transgression zone (NTZ), a color change alert if the
aircraft transponder becomes inoperative,
synthesized voice alerts, digital mapping, and like
features contained in the PRM system.
final monitor controller—air traffic control
specialist assigned to radar monitor the flight path
of aircraft during simultaneous parallel and
simultaneous close parallel ILS approach
operations. Each runway is assigned a final monitor
controller during simultaneous parallel and
simultaneous close parallel ILS approaches. Final
monitor controllers use the precision runway
monitor (PRM) system during simultaneous close
parallel ILS approaches.
fix end reduction area—the area of a holding pattern
that can be reduced in size under certain conditions.
flight check—a call sign prefix used by special FAA
aircraft engaged in the flight inspection/certification
of navigation aids and flight procedures.
Flight Data Center (FDC)—the department in
Washington, D.C. that publishes appropriate flight
data defining the National Airspace System.

/

615

flight data controller—an operating position within
both a control tower and an ARTCC whose duties
are to maintain and update relevant information
concerning aircraft and the air traffic control
system.
flight data input/output (FDIO)—an improved
communications device using a video terminal and
keyboard that will eventually replace the Flight
Data Entry and Printout device.
flight data processing (FDP)—the computer system
in the ARTCC that provides automation capability
to accept and store flight plan information, print
and distribute flight plan information in the form
of flight progress strips, calculate and update flight
plan data, and transfer flight plan data
automatically from one sector to the next within
any particular ARTCC, from one ARTCC to the
adjacent ARTCCs, and from ARTCCs to FDIOequipped control towers and TRACONs.
flight information regions (FIRs)—airspace within
which air traffic control services will be provided.
flight information service—a service provided for
the purpose of giving advice and information useful
for the safe and efficient conduct of flights.
flight inspection field office (FIFO)—the operational
office where flight inspection aircraft, crews, and
technicians are located.
flight levels—a level of constant atmospheric
pressure related to a reference datum of 29.92
inches of mercury. Every flight level is stated in
hundreds of feet, with the last two zeroes being
dropped.
flight management system (FMS)—a computer
system that uses a large database to allow routes to
be preprogrammed and fed into the system by
means of a data loader. The system is constantly
updated with respect to position accuracy by
reference to conventional navigation aids. The
sophisticated program and its associated database
ensure that the most appropriate aids are
automatically selected during the information
update cycle.
flight progress strips—standardized paper strips that
contain essential flight information about aircraft
participating in the National Airspace System. The
flight progress strips used in the ARTCCs are of a
different configuration than those used in air traffic
control towers.
flight restricted zone (FRZ)—the inner portion of
the Washington, D.C. domestic ADIZ with increased
restrictions on VFR and IFR flight.

616 / Glossary
flight service station (FSS)—an air traffic control
facility that provides pilot briefings and en route
communications and that conducts VFR search and
rescue services. Selected flight service stations also
provide en route flight advisory service.
flight trajectory modeling—the procedure whereby
the AERA computer projects an aircraft’s position
forward in four dimensions: lateral, longitudinal,
vertical, and temporal.
flow control—the slang term used to encompass all
FAA traffic metering programs.
formal runway use program—an approved noise
abatement program which requires a letter of
understanding, and participation in the program is
mandatory for aircraft operators/pilots.
four-course radio range—an obsolete navigational
aid that used an aural signal for navigation.
framing pulses—the two pulses that begin and end a
reply from an airborne transponder.
free flight—an FAA initiative to develop an ATC
system that provides a safe and efficient flight
operating capability under IFR, in which the
operators have the freedom to select their path and
speed in real time. Air traffic restrictions are only
imposed to ensure separation, to preclude exceeding
airport capacity, to prevent unauthorized flight
through special use airspace SUA, and to ensure
safety of flight.
frequency shift—a component of the Doppler effect
wherein the frequency of an approaching object
appears to increase.
Fresnel lens—a type of lens used on runway lights to
collect and focus the light toward the approach ends
of the runway.
front course—the side of the ILS approach typically
used for navigation. The front course is also
typically equipped with a glide slope and marker
beacons.
fruit—electronic radar interference caused by
transponders replying to multiple interrogations
from different radar systems.
fuel remaining—a phrase used by either pilots or
controllers when relating to the fuel remaining on
board until actual fuel exhaustion. When
transmitting such information in response to
either a controller question or pilot-initiated
cautionary advisory to air traffic control, pilots
will state the approximate number of minutes the
flight can continue with the fuel remaining. All
reserve fuel should be included in the time stated,

as should an allowance for established fuel gauge
system error.
full performance level (FPL) controller—a controller
fully certified at every assigned operating position.
Also called facility rated.
full route clearance (FRC)—the procedure of
verbally stating the entire route of flight to the pilot.
full-scale deflection —a term used to describe the
condition where the course deviation indicator has
reached its maximum off-course limit.
future air navigation system—a description of the
aircraft component of a system that can provide
direct data link communication between the pilot
and the controller.
gain—a control on a radar system that increases the
intensity of displayed radar returns.
gate hold procedures—procedures at selected
airports to hold aircraft at the gate or other ground
location whenever departure delays exceed or are
anticipated to exceed 15 minutes. The sequence for
departure will be maintained in accordance with
initial call up unless modified by flow control
restrictions. Pilots should monitor the ground
control/clearance delivery frequency for engine start/
taxi advisories or new proposed start/taxi time if the
delay changes.
General Schedule (GS)—the universal pay schedule
used to pay federal employees.
Geo-Map—the digitized map markings associated
with the ASR-9 radar system.
glide path—see glide slope.
glide slope critical area—the area immediately
surrounding the glide slope transmitter that must be
kept clear of potentially reflective objects (such as
vehicles, aircraft, or equipment).
glide slope intercept altitude—the minimum altitude
to intercept the glide slope path on a precision
approach. The intersection of the published
intercept altitude with the glide slope path,
designated on government charts by the lightning
bolt symbol, is the precision FAF; however, when
ATC directs a lower altitude, the resultant lower
intercept position is then the FAF.
glide slope—the electronic path produced by the
glide slope transmitter of an instrument landing
system to provide vertical guidance for the pilot.
global navigation satellite system (GNSS)—the
generic term for all satellite-based navigation
systems.

Glossary
Global Positioning System (GPS)—a space-based
radio positioning, navigation, and time-transfer
system. The system provides highly accurate
position and velocity information, and precise time,
on a continuous global basis, to an unlimited
number of properly equipped users. The system is
unaffected by weather, and provides a worldwide
common grid reference system. The GPS concept is
predicated upon accurate and continuous
knowledge of the spatial position of each satellite in
the system with respect to time and distance from a
transmitting satellite to the user. The GPS receiver
automatically selects appropriate signals from the
satellites in view and translates these into threedimensional position, velocity, and time. System
accuracy for civil users is normally 100 meters
horizontally.
government accounting office (GAO)—the
investigative arm of Congress charged with
examining matters relating to the receipt and
payment of public funds.
graphic plan display (GPD)—a view available with
URET that provides a graphic display of aircraft,
traffic, and notification of predicted conflicts.
gray scale—the scale used to code and decode
altitude transmissions from mode C transponders.
Greenwich mean time (GMT)—see coordinated
universal time.
ground clutter—a pattern produced on the radar
scope by ground returns which may degrade other
radar returns in the affected area. The effect of
ground clutter is minimized by the use of moving
target indicator (MTI) circuits in the radar
equipment resulting in a radar presentation which
displays only targets which are in motion.
ground control—the operating position in a control
tower responsible for aircraft and vehicular
movement about the surface of the airport,
including taxiways and inactive runways. The
ground controller is not responsible for the
movement of aircraft on or across active runways.
ground taxiing—a condition wherein a helicopter
taxis while still in contact with ground.
ground track—the actual flight path of an aircraft
over the surface of the Earth.
ground wave—the LORAN-C signal that remains
close to the surface of the Earth.
group form—saying several numbers as a group
rather than enunciating them individually. For

/

617

example, the group form pronunciation of the
number 100 is “one hundred.”
group repetition interval (GRI)—the unique time
interval between transmissions of a LORAN-C
master station. Each LORAN-C chain is identified
using its unique GRI.
handoff—the action taken to transfer the radar
identification of an aircraft from one controller to
another when the aircraft will enter the receiving
controller’s airspace and radio communications
will be transferred.
Hazardous In-Flight Weather Advisory Service
(HIWAS)—continuous recorded hazardous in-flight
weather forecasts broadcasted to airborne pilots over
selected VOR outlets defined as an HIWAS
Broadcast Area.
heading indicator—the cockpit indicator that shows
the aircraft heading.
heavy aircraft—an aircraft with a maximum certified
takeoff weight of more than 255,000 pounds.
high-altitude redesign (HAR)—a level of
nonrestrictive routing service for aircraft that have
all waypoints associated with the HAR program in
their flight management systems or RNAV equipage.
high-altitude VORs—VOR stations that have
frequency assignments such that they can be used by
aircraft operating at or above flight level 180.
high-altitude en route flight advisory service—a
service of selected flight services stations specifically
designed to provide timely weather information to
pilots en route at altitudes at or above FL 180.
high frequency—the frequency band between 3
mHz and 30 mHz.
high-intensity approach lighting system (ALSF)—
approach lighting systems that extend 2,400 feet to
3,000 feet from the end of the runway. ALSF-1
includes sequenced flashing lights and used to be the
standard for Category I ILS runways (MALSR is
now the standard installation). ALSF-2 includes
sequenced flashing lights and is the standard
configuration for Category II ILS runways.
high-intensity runway lighting (HIRL)—runway
lighting, primarily used on instrument runways,
with a maximum wattage of 200 watts. Highintensity runway lights operate on one of five steps,
with step one being the lowest illumination and step
five the highest.
history—the radar targets displayed on the plan
position indicator for a number of antenna

618 / Glossary
revolutions before completely disappearing. The
most recent targets are the brightest, with
subsequent targets becoming somewhat lower in
intensity. History is what the controller uses to
determine an aircraft’s relative direction of flight
and its velocity.
hold procedure—a predetermined maneuver that
keeps aircraft within a specified airspace while
awaiting further clearance from air traffic control.
Also used during ground operations to keep aircraft
within a specified area or at a specified point while
awaiting further clearance from air traffic control.
holding pattern—a predefined, oval shaped flight
pattern assigned to aircraft whose progress along
their route of flight must be delayed.
holding short—a point on a runway, taxiway, or
ramp beyond which an aircraft is not authorized to
proceed. This point may be located prior to an
intersecting runway, taxiway, predetermined point,
or approach/departure flight path.
homing—flight toward a navigation aid without
correcting for wind, by adjusting the aircraft
heading to maintain a relative bearing of zero
degrees.
host and oceanic computer system replacement
(HOCSR)—a program to replace the aging
computer systems at all domestic and oceanic
ARTCCs.
host computer—the IBM 3083 computer once used
in the ARTCCs for radar and data processing.
hover taxiing—used to describe a helicopter
movement conducted above the surface and in
ground effect at airspeeds less than approximately
20 knots.
hyperbolic navigation system—a navigation system
that uses time delay between signals originating at
two different transmitting stations to calculate lines
of position.
ICAO Annexes—international guidelines developed
by the International Civil Aviation Organization for
the operation of air traffic services. These Annexes
cover the following subjects: Personnel Licensing,
Rules of the Air, Meteorology, Aeronautical Charts,
Units of Measurement to be Used in Air-Ground
Communications, Operation of Aircraft, Aircraft
Nationality and Registration Marks, Airworthiness
of Aircraft, Facilitation, Aeronautical Telecommunications, Air Traffic Services, Search and Rescue,
Aircraft Accident Inquiry, Aerodromes,

Aeronautical Information Services, Aircraft Noise,
Security, and Safe Transport of Dangerous Goods
by Air.
Ident—the feature of the air traffic control radar
beacon system that causes the special identification
pulse to be transmitted by the aircraft’s transponder.
identification friend or foe (IFF)—the system
developed in World War II that preceded the air
traffic control radar beacon system.
IFR military training routes (IR)—routes used by
the Department of Defense and associated Reserve
and Air Guard units for the purpose of conducting
low-altitude navigation and tactical training in both
IFR and VFR weather conditions below 10,000 feet
MLS at airspeeds in excess of 250 knots IAS.
IFR takeoff minimums and departure procedures—
FAR Part 91, prescribes standard takeoff rules for
certain civil users. At some airports, obstructions or
other factors require the establishment of
nonstandard takeoff minimums, departure
procedures, or both to assist pilots in avoiding
obstacles during climb to the minimum en route
altitude. Those airports are listed in NOS/DoD
Instrument Approach Charts (IAPs) under a section
entitled “IFR Takeoff Minimums and Departure
Procedures.”
ILS distance measuring equipment—standard
distance measuring equipment colocated with an
ILS localizer transmitter.
inactive runways—runways not declared active by
the local controller. Inactive runways are the
responsibility of the ground controller.
indicated airspeed—the airspace displayed on an
aircraft’s airspeed indicator.
inertial navigation system (INS)—an area navigation
system dependent on accelerometers to determine an
aircraft’s position and route of flight.
informal runway use program—an approved noise
abatement program which does not require a Letter
of Understanding, and participation in the program
is voluntary for aircraft operators/pilots.
information request (INREQ)—a request originating
from a flight service station for information
concerning a lost or overdue aircraft.
initial approach fix (IAF)—the fixes depicted on
navigation charts that identify the beginning of the
initial approach segment of an instrument approach
procedure.

Glossary
initial approach segment—the segment of an
instrument approach procedure that guides the
aircraft from an initial approach fix to an
intermediate approach fix.
initial sector suite subsystem (ISSS)—the initial
improved hardware that will replace the plan view
displays at area control facilities.
initial separation procedures—the procedures and
rules used to separate aircraft immediately after
departure.
inner marker (IM)—a marker beacon used with
Category II and Category III ILS approach systems.
The inner marker is approximately halfway between
the middle marker and the approach end of the
runway.
instrument approach procedure (IAP)—a series of
predetermined maneuvers that permit an IFR
aircraft to leave the confines of the airway structure
and descend for landing at an airport.
instrument approach procedure charts—a graphic
depiction of the maneuvers used during an
instrument approach procedure.
instrument flight rules (IFR)—the rules that govern
the conduct of aircraft during instrument flight.
instrument landing system (ILS)—a precision
approach and landing aid that normally consists of
a localizer, a glide slope, marker beacons, and an
approach light system.
1. ILS Category I—An ILS approach procedure
that provides for approach to a height above
touchdown of not less than 200 feet and
with runway visual range of not less than
1,800 feet.
2. ILS Category II—An ILS approach procedure
that provides for approach to a height above
touchdown of not less than 100 feet and
with runway visual range of not less than
1,200 feet.
3. ILS Category III
a. IIIA—An ILS approach procedure that
provides for approach without a decision
height minimum and with runway visual
range of not less than 700 feet.
b. IIIB—An ILS approach procedure that
provides for approach without a decision
height minimum and with runway visual
range of not less than 150 feet.
c. IIIC—An ILS approach procedure that
provides for approach without a decision

/

619

height minimum and without runway visual
range minimum.
instrument meteorological conditions—
meteorological conditions expressed in terms of
visibility, distance from cloud, and ceiling less than
the minima specified for visual meteorological
conditions.
Intercept—the act of an aircraft joining another
route of flight such as an airway or radial.
Interdepartmental Air Traffic Control Board
(IATCB)— An organization formed on April 7,
1941, to coordinate activities between the Civil
Aeronautics Administration and the military
services. This board remained in existence until
1946.
intermediate approach segment—the segment of an
instrument approach procedure that guides the
aircraft from an intermediate approach fix to the
final approach fix.
International Air Transport Association (IATA)—an
international organization of airlines that has
assisted in the definition of minimum navigation
performance specification airspace.
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO)—
A specialized agency of the United Nations whose
objective is to develop the principles and techniques
of international air navigation and air traffic
control.
International Flight Information Manual (IFIM)—a
publication designed primarily as a pilot’s preflight
planning guide for flights into foreign airspace and
for flights returning to the United States from
foreign locations.
international standards and recommended
practices—the recommended procedures
promulgated by ICAO.
interrogator—the ground-based component of
ATCRBS. Also, a major component of the airborne
equipment used for distance measuring.
Interstate Airway Communication Stations
(INSACSs)—radio communications facilities
strategically located to offer flight advisory services
to aircraft operating along the federal airways.
INSACSs were staffed by air traffic controllers who
communicated directly with pilots by radio and
passed along weather information and instructions
from the controllers working at the airway traffic
control centers. INSACSs became flight service
stations.

620 / Glossary
jet advisory areas—areas created to provide
advisory services to civilian and military turbojet
aircraft operating at high altitudes. The jet advisory
areas extended from FL 240 to FL 410 and
projected 14 nautical miles laterally on either side of
every high-altitude airway. Air traffic controllers
were required to use radar to constantly monitor
every IFR aircraft operating on a jet route and to
issue any heading change necessary to ensure that
the IFR aircraft remained separated from
unidentified aircraft observed on the controller’s
radar display. The jet advisory areas were replaced
by the positive control area.
jet route—a route designed to serve aircraft
operations from 18,000 feet MSL up to and
including FL 450. The routes are referred to as “J”
routes with numbering to identify the designated
route; for example J105.
joint surveillance systems (JSSs)—long-range radar
surveillance systems jointly operated by the Federal
Aviation Administration and the Department of
Defense.
joint use airspace—airspace used for national
defense that is released for civilian use when it is not
needed by the military.
keyboard—a data input device used by the flight
data entry and printout system, the radar data
processing system found in ARTCCs, and ARTS
radar systems.
knots—a unit of speed equal to 1 nautical mile per
hour.
land and hold short operations—operations that
include simultaneous takeoffs and landings and/or
simultaneous landings when a landing aircraft is
able and is instructed by the controller to hold-short
of the intersecting runway/taxiway or designated
hold-short point.
Landing Aids Experiment Station (LAES)—a
research center established in 1945 by the CAA,
Army Air Corps, and Navy Department at the
Naval Air Station at Arcata, California. It was here
that most of the pioneering research in approach
lighting was conducted.
landing minima—the minimum visibility prescribed
for landing a civil aircraft while using an instrument
approach procedure. The minimum applies with
other limitations set forth in FAR 91 with respect to
the minimum descent altitude (MDA) or decision

height (DH) prescribed in the instrument approach
procedures as follows:
1. Straight-in landing minima—A statement
of MDA and visibility, or DH and visibility,
required for a straight-in landing on a specified
runway, or
2. Circling minima—A statement of MDA
and visibility required for the circle-to-land
maneuver.
large aircraft—aircraft with a maximum certificated
takeoff weight of more than 41,000 pounds up to
and including 255,000 pounds.
lateral navigation (LNAV)—a function of area
navigation (RNAV) equipment which calculates,
displays, and provides lateral guidance to a profile
or path.
lateral navigation/vertical navigation (LNAV/
VNAV)—an approach procedure that uses GPS for
lateral guidance with vertical guidance provided by
either the barometric altimeter or WAAS.
lateral separation—a method of separating aircraft
operating at the same altitude but on different routes.
left traffic—a traffic pattern with left turns.
letters of agreement (LOA)—official documents that
clarify the methods and procedures to be used by
controllers at different air traffic control facilities.
light gun—a hand-held, highly directional lightsignaling device used to communicate instructions
to aircraft not equipped with operable radio
communications equipment.
line of sight—a term used to describe a direct,
unobstructed transmission path.
linear polarization (LP)—the normal operating
mode of primary air traffic control radar.
local area augmentation system (LAAS)—a GPS
augmentation system aircraft based on real-time
correction of the GPS signal using a reference
receiver on or near the airport.
local controller—the controller whose responsibility
is the sequencing and spacing of aircraft operating
on the active runways of an airport.
localizer—the component of the instrument landing
system that provides lateral guidance to the aircraft.
localizer back course—the localizer emanations as
they appear to an aircraft approaching the
reciprocal runway.

Glossary
localizer back course approaches—a nonprecision
approach to a reciprocal runway served by ILS
using the back side of the localizer transmission.
localizer critical area—the area immediately
surrounding the localizer transmitter that must be
kept clear of potentially reflective objects, such as
vehicles, aircraft, or equipment.
localizer directional aid (LDA)—a navigation aid
used for instrument approaches that operates
similarly to and provides the same accuracy as an
ILS localizer.
locator middle marker (LMM)—a nondirectional
beacon (NDB) that has been colocated with a
middle marker beacon transmitter.
locator outer marker (LOM)—a nondirectional
beacon (NDB) that has been colocated with an
outer marker beacon transmitter.
longitudinal separation—a method of separating
aircraft operating at the same altitude on the same
route.
long-range navigation (LORAN)—an area
navigation system that uses multiple transmitters to
plot hyperbolic lines of position.
lost communications—loss of the ability to
communicate by radio. Aircraft are sometimes
referred to as NORDO (No Radio). Standard pilot
procedures are specified in FAR 91. Radar
controllers issue procedures for pilots to follow in
the event of lost communications during a radar
approach when weather reports indicate that an
aircraft will likely encounter IFR weather conditions
during the approach.
low-altitude airway structure—the network of
airways serving aircraft operations up to but not
including 18,000 feet MSL.
low-altitude VORs—VOR stations that have
frequency assignments such that they can only be
used by aircraft operating below flight level 180.
low approach—an approach over a runway in
which the pilot initiates a departure before making
contact with the runway.
low frequency—the frequency band between 30 and
300 kHz.
low-intensity runway lighting (LIRL)—the most
inexpensive lighting system to install, typically
equipped with 15-watt bulbs that operate on one
intensity level (step one).

/

621

LPV—a type of approach with vertical guidance
(APV) based on WAAS, published on RNAV (GPS)
approach charts. This procedure takes advantage of
the precise lateral guidance available from WAAS.
The minima are published as a decision altitude (DA).
mach—the ratio of true airspeed to the speed of
sound. Mach 1.0 is the speed of sound.
magnetic compass—a self-contained airborne
direction system that displays aircraft heading using
the Earth’s magnetic field.
magnetic heading—the direction an aircraft is
pointed using the magnetic compass as a reference.
magnetic north—the heading that would eventually
lead the aircraft over the magnetic north pole.
main bang—the spot on a plan position indicator
that represents the location of the rotating radar
antenna.
maintain—a term that means to remain at the
altitude/flight level specified.
maintain VFR—an instruction directing the pilot to
conduct flight while remaining in visual
meteorological conditions when complying with
visual flight rules.
marker beacon—an electronic navigation facility
that transmits a low-intensity coded signal on
75 mHz. Marker beacons are typically used as
part of an instrument landing system.
master station—the station in a Loran-C chain that
initiates the transmission of pulse pairs.
maximum authorized altitude (MAA)—a published
altitude representing the maximum usable altitude
or flight level for an airspace structure or route
segment. It is the highest altitude on a federal
airway, jet route, area navigation low or high route,
or other direct route for which an MEA is
designated in FAR 95 at which adequate reception
of navigation aid signals is assured.
medium frequency—the frequency band between
300 and 3,000 kHz.
medium-intensity approach lighting system
(MALS)— An inexpensive approach lighting system
that operates on three steps of intensity, with step
three being equivalent in intensity to step three on
an ALSF system. Using medium-intensity white
lamps, MALS systems extend 1,400 feet from the
runway threshold, with the light bars spaced at
200-foot intervals.

622 / Glossary
medium-intensity approach lighting system with
RAIL (MALSR)—an inexpensive approach lighting
system similar to MALS that incorporates runway
alignment indicator lights (RAIL). MALSR systems
extend 2,400 feet from the runway threshold, with
the light bars spaced at 200-foot intervals. MALSR
approach lighting systems operate on step one
through step three, with step three being equivalent
in intensity to step three on an ALSF system.
medium-intensity runway lighting (MIRL)—runway
edge lights equipped with 40-watt bulbs. MIRL
lighting can be operated on three intensity levels.
When operated on step one, medium-intensity lights
produce the same light level as low-intensity lights
(15 watts). When functioning on step two, they
operate at about 25 watts, and on step three, they
operate at the maximum allowable 40-watt level.
merging-target procedures—procedures that
describe what a controller must do if two aircraft
radar targets are predicted to merge together and
the aircraft are at or near the same altitude.
metering—a method of time regulating arrival
traffic flow into a terminal area so as not to exceed
a predetermined terminal acceptance rate.
metering airports—airports adapted for metering
and for which optimum flight paths are defined.
A maximum of 15 airports may be adapted.
metering fix—a fix along an established route from
over which aircraft will be metered prior to entering
terminal airspace. Normally, this fix should be
established at a distance from the airport that will
facilitate a profile descent 10,000 feet above airport
elevation (AAE) or above.
Microprocessor en route automated radar tracking
system (MEARTS)—an automated radar and radar
beacon tracking system capable of employing both
short-range (ASR) and long-range (ARSR) radars.
middle marker (MM)—a marker beacon typically
placed approximately 1/2 nautical mile from the
approach end of a runway served by an instrument
landing system.
military assumes responsibility for separation of
aircraft (MARSA)—a condition whereby the
military service involved assumes responsibility for
air traffic control separation between participating
military aircraft.
military operations areas (MOAs)—airspace where
intensive military training operations are conducted.
IFR aircraft are routed around these areas whenever
the areas are active.

military training route (MTR)—airspace where
military training missions are conducted at airspeeds
in excess of 250 knots.
millibars—metric pressure measurement intervals;
used primarily in reference to altimeter settings.
minimum descent altitude (MDA)—the lowest
altitude to which descent is authorized during a
nonprecision instrument approach procedure.
minimum en route altitude (MEA)—the lowest
published altitude between navigational fixes that
provides both obstacle clearance and adequate
navigation radio reception.
minimum navigation performance specifications
airspace (MNPSA)—the airspace that extends from
the northeastern United States to Great Britain,
from about FL 275 to FL 420.
minimum obstruction clearance altitude (MOCA)—
the lowest published altitude between navigational
fixes that provides obstacle clearance over the entire
route and adequate navigation radio reception
within 22 nautical miles of the navaid transmitter.
minimum safe altitude warning (MSAW)—a
function of air traffic control computer systems that
alerts the controller whenever a mode C–equipped
aircraft is below or is predicted to descend below a
predetermined minimum safe altitude.
minimum vectoring altitude (MVA)—the lowest
altitude above sea level at which IFR aircraft may be
vectored by the controller.
missed approach point (MAP)—the point at which
the missed approach procedure will be performed
by the pilot if the required visual references do not
exist.
missed approach procedure—the maneuver
performed by a pilot when an instrument approach
cannot be completed to a landing.
missed approach segment—the segment of an
instrument approach procedure that lies between
the missed approach point and a predetermined
missed approach fix.
mode C altitude encoder—the component on the
aircraft that transmits altitude information to the
ground-based radar system.
mode C intruder alert—a function of certain air
traffic control automated systems designed to alert
radar controllers to existing or pending situations
between a tracked target (known IFR or VFR
aircraft) and an untracked target (unknown IFR or

Glossary
VFR aircraft) that requires immediate attention/
action.
mode S—a transponder mode that will permit
individual aircraft interrogation and data link
transfer.
modes—the letter or number assigned to a specific
pulse spacing of the radio signals transmitted by
various ATCRBS components.
Morrow Report—the report of the Morrow
Commission that established the framework for
federal control of the national airspace system.
moving target detection (MTD)—an electronic
subsystem that removes nonmoving targets from
ATC radar displays.
moving target indicator (MTI)—an electronic device
that will permit radar scope presentation only from
targets that are in motion. A partial remedy for
ground clutter.
MTI gate—the control that adjusts the range at
which MTI becomes effective.
MTI/MTD video gain—the control that adjusts the
number of MTI- or MTD-processed radar returns
that should be displayed.
multimode receiver (MMR)—a receiver capable of
using many different frequencies and navigation
systems.
narrowband—the operation of NAS-A, DARC, or
EARTS radar such that it creates a mosaic display.
National Air Traffic Controllers Association
(NATCA)—one of the current labor organizations
that represent air traffic controllers.
national airspace review (NAR)—an FAA review of
the rules and procedures governing the use of the
nation’s airspace.
National Airspace System stage A (NAS-A)—the en
route ATC system’s radar, computers and computer
programs, controller plan view displays (PVDs/
radar scopes), input/output devices, and the related
communications equipment that are integrated to
form the heart of the automated IFR air traffic
control system. This equipment performs flight data
processing (FDP) and radar data processing (RDP).
It interfaces with automated terminal systems and is
used in the control of en route IFR aircraft.
National Aviation Facilities Experimental Center
(NAFEC)— The outdated, but still commonly used
acronym for the FAA Technical Center located in
Atlantic City, New Jersey.

/

623

National Beacon Code Allocation Plan (NBCAP)—
the national plan by which transponder codes are
issued for use at individual air traffic control
facilities.
National Ocean Service (NOS)—the arm of the
federal government that provides navigation charts to
the FAA and the flying public. The National Ocean
Service is part of the Department of Commerce.
national security areas (NSAs)—airspace that has
either temporary or permanent flight restriction to
national security needs.
National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB)—the
arm of the Department of Transportation charged
with investigating all major transportation
accidents.
National Weather Service (NWS)—the arm of the
Department of Commerce charged with collecting,
disseminating, and forecasting weather conditions
for the public.
navigation aids (navaids)—any visual or electronic
device used by pilots to navigate.
negotiated routes—the future process whereby the
ATC system and the pilot/aircraft will establish
flight routes in real time.
Next Generation Air Transportation System
(NextGen)—a general term used to describe the
ongoing evolution of the national airspace system to
a performance-based system.
next-generation radar (NEXRAD)—a weather
detection radar system.
night differential—extra pay that controllers receive
for working night shifts.
no transgression zone (NTZ)—a 2,000-foot wide
zone, located equidistant between parallel runway
final approach courses in which flight is not allowed.
noise—as used in electronics, randomly generated
electronic signals.
nondirectional beacon (NDB)—a radio navigation
beacon that transmits a uniform signal
omnidirectionally using either the LF or MF radio
frequency band.
nonprecision approach—a standard instrument
approach procedure in which no electronic glide
path is provided.
nonradar approach control tower—an ATC facility
authorized to provide separation to aircraft landing
or departing from that airport as well as to IFR
aircraft without the use of radar.

624 / Glossary
normal video gain—the radar control that regulates
the amplification of the displayed radar signal.
North American Aerospace Defense Command
(NORAD)—a joint U.S./Canada military command
responsible for the air defense of North America.
North American Route—a numerically coded route
preplanned over existing airway and route systems
to and from specific coastal fixes serving the North
Atlantic.
North Atlantic Region (NAR)—that area over the
North Atlantic Ocean within which certain air
traffic control rules apply.
North Mark—a beacon data block sent by the host
computer to be displayed by the ARTS on a 360°
bearing at a locally selected radar azimuth and
distance. The North Mark is used to ensure correct
range/azimuth orientation during periods of CENRAP.
North Pacific (NOPAC)—an organized route system
between the Alaskan west coast and Japan.
notice to airmen (NOTAM)—a notice containing
information (not known sufficiently in advance to
publicize by other means) concerning the
establishment, condition, or change in any
component (facility, service, or procedure of, or
hazard in the National Airspace System) the timely
knowledge of which is essential to personnel
concerned with flight operations.
1. NOTAM(D)—A NOTAM given (in addition
to local dissemination) distant dissemination
beyond the area of responsibility of the flight
service station. These NOTAMs will be stored
and available until canceled.
2. NOTAM(L)—A NOTAM given local
dissemination by voice and other means, such as
telautograph and telephone, to satisfy local user
requirements.
3. FDC NOTAM—A NOTAM regulatory in
nature, transmitted by USNOF and given
systemwide dissemination.
oceanic airspace—airspace over the oceans of the
world, considered international airspace, where
oceanic separation and procedures per the
International Civil Aviation Organization are applied.
Responsibility for the provisions of air traffic control
service in this airspace is delegated to various
countries, based generally on geographic proximity
and the availability of the required resources.
Oceanic Area Control Centers (OACC)—area
control centers with responsibility for oceanic
airspace.

Oceanic Display and Planning System (ODAPS)—an
automated digital display system that provides flight
data processing, conflict probe, and situation display
for oceanic air traffic control.
off route vector—a vector by ATC that takes an
aircraft off a previously assigned route. Altitudes
assigned by ATC during such vectors provide
required obstacle clearance.
Office of Personnel Management (OPM)—the
federal office charged with conducting initial air
traffic controller hiring for the FAA.
Office of the Secretary of Transportation (OST)—
the administrative function of the U.S. Secretary of
Transportation.
offset parallel runways—staggered runways having
parallel centerlines.
offshore control area—that portion of airspace
between the U.S. 12-mile limit and the oceanic CTA/
FIR boundary within which air traffic control is
exercised. These areas are established to permit the
application of domestic procedures in the provision
of air traffic control services.
omni bearing selector (OBS)—the cockpit control
used to select the desired radial of a VORTAC.
option clearance—an approach requested and
conducted by a pilot that will result in either a
touch-and-go, missed approach, low approach, stopand-go, or full stop landing.
outer marker (OM)—a marker beacon located
approximately at the glide slope interception altitude of
an ILS approach.
Pacific organized track system (PACOTS)—flexible
tracks generated twice daily, depending on winds,
between North America and Hawaii to Asia and
Australia.
part-task training—a means of training using
simulators that do not replicate the entire operating
environment.
passive control—when air traffic controllers permit
pilots to effect separation and intervene only when
necessary.
performance-based navigation (PBN)—area
navigation based on performance requirements for
aircraft operating along an ATS route, on an
instrument approach procedure or in a designated
airspace.
performance-based organization (PBO)—the
reorganization of the air traffic control functions of

Glossary
the FAA into an administrative structure that more
resembles a private corporation.
performance verification—FAA exams at the
conclusion of training to ensure controller
competence.
permanent echo—radar signals reflected from fixed
objects on the Earth’s surface; for example
buildings, towers, terrain. Permanent echoes are
distinguished from “ground clutter” by being
definable locations rather than large areas. Under
certain conditions, they may be used to check radar
alignment.
phantom VORTAC—a nonexistent VORTAC
created at a predetermined point by an area
navigation system. A phantom VORTAC is the same
as a waypoint.
pilot-controlled lighting (PCL) systems—a runway
and/or approach lighting system that can be
controlled by the pilot through the aircraft’s VHF
communications radio.
pilot’s discretion—when used in conjunction with
altitude assignments, means that ATC has offered
the pilot the option of starting climb or descent
whenever they wish and conducting the climb or
descent at any rate.
pilot reports (PIREPs)—reports made by pilots
about meteorological conditions encountered while
in flight.
pilotage—a means of VFR navigation using
navigational charts for position determination.
plan position indicator (PPI)—a radar display device
that can provide two-dimensional aircraft position
information (azimuth and bearing).
plan view display (PVD)—a radar display device
used by radar mosaic systems (NAS-A, DARC, and
EARTS).
point in space metering—a process whereby aircraft
are issued instructions to ensure that they cross a
specified location at a specific time.
point out—the action taken to transfer the radar
identification of an aircraft from one controller to
another when the aircraft will enter the receiving
controller’s airspace, but radio communications will
not be transferred.
point out approved—an action taken by a controller
to transfer the radar identification of an aircraft to
another controller if the aircraft will or may enter
the airspace of another controller, and radio
communications will not be transferred.

/

625

polar track structure (PTS)—a system of organized
routes between Iceland and Alaska that overlie
Canadian MNPS airspace.
positive control—the separation of all air traffic by
air traffic control within designated airspace.
positive control area (PCA)—the airspace designated
by FAR 71 within which all aircraft are subject to
positive control.
positive separation—the separation of all air traffic
within designated airspace by air traffic control.
precision approach—a standard instrument
approach procedure in which an electronic
glideslope/glidepath is provided.
precision approach path indicator (PAPI)—a visual
navigation device that permits the pilot to judge
the aircraft’s position relative to the desired
glide path.
precision approach radar (PAR)—radar equipment,
primarily used by military air traffic controllers, that
provides aircraft range, bearing, and elevation while
on the approach to a runway.
precision runway monitor (PRM)—provides air
traffic controllers with high precision secondary
surveillance data for aircraft on final approach to
parallel runways that have extended centerlines
separated by less than 4,300 feet.
preferential routes—departure or arrival routes that
increase system efficiency by organizing traffic flows.
preferred arrival route (PAR)—a preferential route
primarily used for aircraft arriving at a terminal
area.
preferred departure route (PDR)—a preferential
route primarily used for aircraft departing a
terminal area.
PRF stagger—a means of staggering a primary radar
system’s pulse repetition frequency to reduce the
effects of aircraft blind speeds.
prime channel—a slang term for the NAS-A radar
processing system used in the ARTCCs.
prime meridian—the 0° line of longitude that passes
through Greenwich, England.
procedure turn—a maneuver performed by a pilot
during an instrument approach when it is
necessary for the aircraft to reverse course to
become established on the intermediate or final
segment of the instrument approach.
Procedures for Air Navigation Services (PANS)—
ICAO recommendations for the establishment and
operation of air traffic control systems.

626 / Glossary
Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization
(PATCO)—the defunct labor organization that
represented many of the controllers in the 1970s
and early 1980s.
prohibited areas—designated airspace within which
the flight of aircraft is absolutely prohibited.
Project Beacon—the FAA task force that
recommended the development and use of the
ATCRBS system and ARTS and NAS-A radar
processing systems.
Provisional International Civil Aviation
Organization (PICAO)—the predecessor of the
International Civil Aviation Organization.
pseudo range—the approximate distance between
the GPS receiver antenna and satellite based upon
signal timing.
pulse repetition frequency (PRF)—the rate at which
primary radar pulses are generated.
pulse repetition rate—the numbers of pulses per
second transmitted by a primary radar system.
pulse train—the reply from an airborne ATCRBS
transponder.
pulse-type radar—radar that transmits multiple
pulses; the opposite of continuous wave radar.
QALQ message—a request made by a flight service
station for information concerning an overdue
aircraft. Any facility that receives a QALQ must
briefly check with every controller and examine
recent flight strips to determine whether any contact
has been made with the overdue aircraft.
quick action keyboard (QAK)—a keyboard used by
ARTCC controllers to extract flight information
from the central computer complex.
quick look—a feature of NAS-A and ARTS that
provides the controller the capability to display full
data blocks of tracked aircraft from other control
positions.
quota flow control (QFLOW)—a flow control
procedure by which the Central Flow Control
Facility (CFCF) restricts traffic to the ARTCC
having an impacted airport, thereby avoiding sector/
area saturation.
radar—radio detection and ranging equipment.
Radar measures the interval between the
transmission and reception of a radio pulse to
determine an aircraft’s bearing and distance.
radar and beacon tracking level (RBTL) system—a
radar system able to establish tracks on both
primary and secondary radar targets.

radar approach control tower—a terminal ATC
facility that uses radar and nonradar capabilities to
provide approach and airport traffic control services
to aircraft.
radar approach—an instrument approach procedure
that uses either precision approach radar (PAR) to
provide azimuth, distance, and elevation
information or airport surveillance radar (ASR) to
provide azimuth and distance information.
radar associate/nonradar controller—the controller
at an ARTCC who assists the radar controller to
effect aircraft separation. This controller is primarily
responsible for updating the appropriate flight
progress strips.
radar contact—the term used by an air traffic
controller to inform the pilot that the aircraft has
been positively identified on the radar display.
radar contact lost—the term used by an air traffic
controller to inform the pilot that the aircraft is no
longer identified on the radar display.
radar controller—a controller who uses radar to
effect aircraft separation.
radar cross section—a theoretical value that
describes the relative radar reflectivity of an object.
radar data acquisition subsystem (RDAS)—the
ARTS subsystem that digitizes primary radar
information and transmits it to the data processing
system for eventual display on the PPI.
radar data processing (RDP)—the second phase of
the ARTCC automation process that provides for
radar input from multiple radar sites, radar mosaic
capability, computer validation and selection of the
most accurate data for display to the controller,
automatic aircraft tracking, visual display of flight
information, and automatic radar handoffs.
radar identification—the process of ascertaining that
an observed radar target is the radar return from a
particular aircraft.
radar identified aircraft—when an aircraft’s position
has been correlated with an observed target or
symbol on the radar display.
radar mile—the time that it takes radar signals
to travel 1 nautical mile: 12.36 microseconds.
A radar mile is a time measurement, not a distance
measurement.
radar mosaic—the type of display system used by
NAS-A, DARC, or EARTS systems that use more
than one radar system to generate a composite
display.

Glossary
radar point out—an action taken by a controller to
transfer the radar identification of an aircraft to
another controller if the aircraft will or may enter
the airspace or protected airspace of another
controller and radio communications will not be
transferred.
radar scope—a slang term used to encompass all
radar displays used in air traffic control.
radar separation—radar spacing of aircraft in
accordance with established criteria.
radar service terminated—the term used by an air
traffic controller to advise the pilot that radar
services will no longer be provided.
radar traffic advisories—advisories issued to alert
pilots to known or observed radar traffic that may
affect the intended route of flight of their aircraft.
Radar Training Facility (RTF)—the facility at the
FAA Academy used for basic radar training of
controllers.
radar vectoring—provision of navigational guidance
to aircraft in the form of specific headings based on
the use of radar.
radar weather echo intensity levels—existing radar
systems cannot detect turbulence. However, there is a
direct correlation between the degree of turbulence
and other weather features associated with
thunderstorms and the radar weather echo intensity.
The National Weather Service has categorized radar
weather echo intensity for precipitation into six
levels. These levels are sometimes expressed during
communications as “VIP LEVEL” 1 through 6
(derived from the component of the radar that
produces the information—Video Integrator and
Processor). The following list gives the “VIP
LEVELS” in relation to the precipitation intensity
within a thunderstorm:
Level 1. Weak
Level 2. Moderate
Level 3. Strong
Level 4. Very strong
Level 5. Intense
Level 6. Extreme
radar-assisted navigation—a controller’s use of
radar to vector an aircraft off a published route or
procedure.
radio—a radio navigation beacon that transmits a
uniform signal omnidirectionally using either the LF
or MF radio frequency band.
radial—a magnetic bearing extending from a VOR/
VORTAC/TACAN navigation facility.

/

627

radial velocity—the apparent velocity of an aircraft
in relation to the radar antenna.
Radio Technical Commission for Aeronautics
(RTCA)—an industry standards setting organization.
range cells—areas of radar coverage used by the
common digitizer to transmit the position of each
aircraft to the central computer complex.
range mark—concentric circles displayed on a plan
position indicator centered on the main bang.
range select switch—the control used to select the
range limits displayed on the plan position indicator.
range time—the interval between the transmission
of a DME interrogation signal and receipt of the
reply to that interrogation.
receiver—the component of a radio device that
receives transmissions.
receiver autonomous integrity monitoring
(RAIM)—a technique whereby a civil GNSS
receiver/processor determines the integrity of the
GNSS navigation signals without reference to
sensors or non-DoD integrity systems other than the
receiver itself.
receiver gain—the amplification control on a
primary radar system.
receiving controller—a controller/facility receiving
control of an aircraft from another controller/
facility.
reduced vertical separation minimum (RSVM)—the
reduction of the standard vertical separation above
FL 290 from 2,000' to 1,000.
regional offices—the nine FAA offices located across
the country that carry out the day-to-day operations
of the FAA. The structure of each regional office is
fairly similar to that of the FAA’s Washington
headquarters.
release time—a departure time restriction issued to a
pilot by ATC (either directly or through an
authorized relay) when necessary to separate a
departing aircraft from other traffic.
remote communication air/ground (RCAG)—an
unmanned VHF/UHF transmitter/receiver facility
used to expand ARTCC air/ground communications
capability.
remote communications outlet (RCO)—an
unmanned communications facility used by
controllers at a flight service station. It is similar to
a remote communication air/ground unit.
remote digital display—a digital radar system that
can provide multiple displays at varied locations.

628 / Glossary
Reply—a request to respond to the transmission.
report crossing (RX)—a request that a pilot report
when the aircraft passes a fix.
report leaving (RL)—a request that a pilot report
when the aircraft leaves or passes through an altitude.
report reaching (RR)—a request that a pilot report
when the aircraft levels off at an assigned altitude.
reporting point—a geographical location in relation
to which the position of an aircraft is reported.
required navigation performance (RNP)—a
statement of the navigational performance necessary
for operation within a defined airspace.
Rescue Coordination Center (RCC)—a facility
equipped and staffed to coordinate search and
rescue operations.
restricted areas—airspace designated by FAR 73
within which the flight of aircraft is not wholly
prohibited but is subject to some operating
restrictions.
reverse sensing—the operation of a localizer
indicator when receiving the localizer back course
signal.
right traffic—a traffic pattern that uses right turns.
runway incursion—an aircraft inadvertently taxiing
onto or across an active runway without the local
controller’s knowledge or permission.
runway separation—the rules used by the local
controller who is responsible for ensuring that
aircraft landing and taking off on the same runway.
runway threshold lights—fixed green lights arranged
symmetrically left and right of the runway centerline
that identify the runway threshold. Threshold lights
may be designed to appear red to aircraft
approaching from the opposite direction.
runway use program—a noise abatement runway
selection plan designed to enhance noise abatement
efforts.
runway visual range (RVR)—a system that derives a
value representing the horizontal distance that pilots
see down the runway.
safety alert—a warning issued by a controller when
an aircraft may be in unsafe proximity to other
aircraft, terrain, or obstructions.
search and rescue (SAR)—a service that seeks to
locate missing aircraft and aid any individual in
need of assistance.
secondary surveillance radar (SSR)—see air traffic
control radar beacon system.

secretary of transportation—the administrator of
the Department of Transportation.
sectional charts—VFR navigational charts scaled 1:
500,000, or about 8 statute miles to the inch.
sector suites—see initial sector suite subsystem.
sectors—areas within which a single controller has
responsibility for aircraft separation.
see and avoid—a visual procedure wherein pilots
flying in VFR conditions, regardless of the type of
flight plan, are responsible for observing the
presence of other aircraft and maneuvering to avoid
these aircraft. Also called “see and be seen.”
selective interrogation—the process whereby mode S
transponders will be able to interrogate individual
aircraft.
semiautomated ground environment (SAGE)—an air
defense system developed by the U.S. Air Force in
the late 1950s.
sensitivity time control (STC)—circuitry designed to
provide a method by which primary radar echoes can
be equalized before they are displayed on the PPI. It
is an electronic means of automatically controlling
the sensitivity of the receiver to equalize the display
intensity of both nearby and distant targets.
separation error—a loss of minimum required
separation.
sequenced flashing lights (SFL)—high-intensity
condenser discharge strobe lights usually placed in
conjunction with approach lighting systems.
service volume—the area within which reliable VOR
and VORTAC reception is ensured.
severe weather avoidance plan (SWAP)—an
approved plan to minimize the affect of severe
weather on traffic flows in impacted terminal and/or
ARTCC areas. SWAP is typically implemented to
provide the least disruption to the ATC system when
flight through portions of airspace is difficult or
impossible due to severe weather.
short approach—a request for the pilot to reduce
the size of the traffic pattern.
shrimp boat—a small plastic device used to mark an
aircraft’s position on a radar display not using
alphanumerics.
side lobe suppression (SLS)—electronic circuitry
used by the ATCRBS to reduce replies to extraneous
transmissions known as side lobes.
side lobes—unwanted transmissions from the
rotating ATCRBS antenna not associated with the
main transmission.

Glossary
side lobe suppression omnidirectional antenna—a
part of the ATCRBS used to transmit a separate
signal to reduce side lobe interference.
sidestep maneuver—a visual maneuver
accomplished by a pilot at the completion of an
instrument approach to permit a straight-in landing
on a parallel runway not more than 1,200 feet to
either side of the runway to which the instrument
approach was conducted.
SIGMET—a weather advisory issued concerning
weather significant to the safety of all aircraft.
SIGMET advisories cover severe and extreme
turbulence, severe icing, and widespread dust or
sandstorms that reduce visibility to less than 3 miles.
simplex communications—a radio communications
system wherein only one party can communicate at
a time.
simplified directional facility (SDF)—a navigation aid
used for nonprecision approaches that provides a
course similar to the localizer transmitter of an ILS.
simplified short approach lighting system
(SSALS)—a much shorter version of the ALSF-1
approach lighting system; it is only 1,200 feet long.
This system still uses the same high-intensity white
approach lights as the ALSF-1 system, but they are
spaced at 200-foot intervals.
simultaneous ILS approaches—an approach system
permitting simultaneous ILS/MLS approaches to
airports having parallel runways separated by at
least 4,300 feet between centerlines. Integral parts
of a total system are ILS/MLS, radar,
communications, ATC procedures, and appropriate
airborne equipment.
skills building—part of a training program designed
to increase a developmental controller’s traffic
management skills.
slant range distance—the actual distance between
the aircraft and the ground-based DME
transponder.
slave station—the station in a Loran-C chain that
responds to the master station’s transmission.
slew entry device (SED)—a data entry device used
by NAS-A, DARC, EARTS, and ARTS-III systems.
Also known as a trackball.
small aircraft—aircraft of 41,000 pounds or less
maximum certificated takeoff weight.
special aircraft and aircrew authorization required
(SAAAR)—the requirements specified by the FAA
for flight crew and aircraft to fly RNP-based
instrument approach procedures.

/

629

Special Committee 31 (SC-31)—a special
committee of the Radio Technical Commission
for Aeronautics formed to try to predict the
future needs of the nation’s air traffic control
system. The SC-31 report recommended that a
common air traffic control system be developed
that would serve the needs of both military and
civilian pilots.
special identification pulse (SIP)—the pulse
transmitted by an airborne ATCRBS transmitter
when the Ident feature is used.
special use airspace (SUA)—airspace of defined
dimensions within which certain flight activities
must be confined.
special VFR (SVFR)—a clearance in which a VFR
aircraft is provided separation and is permitted to
operate within a control zone when the weather is
below VFR minima.
speed adjustment—an ATC procedure used to
request pilots to adjust aircraft speed to a specific
value for the purpose of providing desired spacing.
Pilots are expected to maintain a speed of plus or
minus 10 knots or 0.02 mach number of the
specified speed.
squawk—to activate the transponder.
stand by—a term meaning that the controller or
pilot must pause for a few seconds, usually to attend
to other duties of a higher priority. Also means to
wait as in “stand by for clearance.”
standard atmospheric pressure—an air pressure of
29.92 inches of mercury.
standard instrument departure (SID)—a charted IFR
departure procedure.
standard terminal arrival route (STAR)—a charted
IFR arrival procedure.
standard terminal automation replacement system
(STARS)—a terminal air traffic control automation
system currently being used in many busier
TRACONs that replaces the existing ARTS
computer and software.
stepping down—the process by which a controller
assigns decreasing discrete altitudes to an aircraft.
stepping up—the process by which a controller
assigns increasing discrete altitudes to an
aircraft.
stop and go clearance—a procedure wherein an
aircraft will land, make a complete stop on the
runway, and then commence a takeoff from that
point.

630 / Glossary
stored program alphanumeric (SPAN)—an
experimental alphanumeric device that preceded the
development of the NAS-A system.
strip request (SR)—a keyboard command to the
flight data automation program that causes a flight
progress strip to be printed.
super high frequency—the frequency band between
3 gHz and 30 gHz.
surveillance approach—an instrument approach
wherein the air traffic controller issues
instructions, for pilot compliance, based on
aircraft position in relation to the final approach
course (azimuth) and the distance (range) from the
end of the runway as displayed on the controller’s
radar scope. The controller will provide
recommended altitudes on final approach if
requested by the pilot.
sweep—the faint line that emanates from the main
bang to the edge of the radar screen. This line
corresponds with the boresight of the antenna, is
synchronized with the radar antenna, and rotates in
the same direction and at the same speed.
sweep decenter—two controls, one that moves the
main bang in a north-south direction and one that
moves the main bang in an east-west direction.
The coordinated use of both controls permits the
controller to move the main bang anywhere on
the PPI.
tactical air navigation (TACAN)—a UHF air
navigation aid that provides azimuth and
distance information to the pilot using a single
frequency.
tangential track—the point at which an aircraft’s
flight track is exactly perpendicular to the radar
transmission.
target—the indication on a radar display resulting
from the reflection of the radar transmission.
target coast—the process by which the secondary
radar system indicates that radar contact with an
aircraft has been lost, but that the aircraft’s
projected position is still being displayed on the
radar screen.
target illumination—the illumination that occurs
when a radar transmission reflects off of a solid
object.
target resolution—a process to ensure that
correlated radar targets do not touch.
taxiway edge lighting—blue lights used to define the
lateral limits of the taxiway surface.

taxiway turnoff lights—green lights embedded in the
runway that lead the pilot to the appropriate
taxiway.
taxiways—paved areas of the airport used by
aircraft to proceed to or from the runways.
Technical Evaluation and Development Center—the
research and development facility of the federal
government that was located in Indianapolis,
Indiana. This facility was replaced by NAFEC in
Atlantic City, New Jersey.
telco—the slang term used by controllers to
reference the local telephone communications
company/system.
temporary flight restrictions (TFR)—areas within
which flight may be temporarily prohibited or
restricted.
ten-channel selector—a mechanical selector used on
older ATC radar systems to select transponder codes
to be displayed.
terminal advanced automation system (TAAS)—a
generic term describing the advanced air traffic
control software and hardware envisioned to be
placed in control towers and approach controls in
the future.
terminal control area (TCA)—airspace extending
upward from the surface of the Earth within which
all aircraft are subject to the operating rules
specified in FAR 91.
terminal Doppler weather radar (TDWR)—a
weather radar system that detects severe weather,
wind shear, and microbursts around high-activity
airports.
terminal instrument approach procedures
(TERPS)— The FAA guidelines for the development
of standard instrument approach procedures.
terminal radar approach control (TRACON)—a
terminal air traffic control facility associated with
an air traffic control tower that uses radar to
provide approach control services to aircraft.
terminal radar service area (TRSA)—airspace
surrounding designated airports wherein controllers
provide separation to all IFR and participating VFR
aircraft. TRSAs are being replaced with airport
radar service areas.
terminal VOR (TVOR)—a VOR that is designed to
be used only within the terminal area for local
navigation and instrument approaches.
threshold—the beginning of that portion of the
runway usable for landing.

Glossary
touch and go clearance—an operation by an aircraft
that lands and departs on a runway without
stopping or exiting the runway.
touchdown, midpoint, and rollout RVRs—runway
visual range equipment located at the approach end
of the runway, midway down the runway, and at the
runway end.
tower cab—the glass-enclosed area of an air traffic
control tower where the controllers observe and
separate aircraft.
tower visibility—the distance up to which objects can
be seen from the control tower, usually expressed in
statute miles.
track—the computer-calculated path of an
aircraft.
track drops—a condition that occurs when a radar
system can no longer detect an aircraft nor project
its flight path.
trackball—see slew entry device.
traffic—a term used by a controller to transfer
radar identification of an aircraft to another
controller for the purpose of coordinating
separation action or a term used by ATC to refer to
one or more aircraft.
traffic advisories—see radar traffic advisories.
traffic alert and collision avoidance system—an
airborne collision avoidance system based on radar
beacon signals which operate independent of
ground-based equipment.
traffic information services (TIS)—an addressed
ground-to air service that provides automatic traffic
advisories via mode S data link.
traffic management system (TMS)—a project of the
FAA designed to integrate all of the FAA’s flow
control functions into one fully integrated system.
traffic management unit (TMU)—one component of
the traffic management system. Individual TMUs
will be established at each ARTCC and at many of
the busier terminal facilities.
traffic observed—a term used when a pilot has a
specific aircraft in sight.
traffic pattern—the traffic flow that is prescribed for
aircraft landing at, taxiing on, or taking off from an
airport. The components of a typical traffic pattern
are upwind leg, crosswind leg, downwind leg, base
leg, and final.
traffic pattern legs—the individual components of a
traffic pattern.

/

631

trajectory-based operations (TBO)—a shift from
clearance-based to trajectory-based control. Aircraft
will fly negotiated trajectories as air traffic control
moves to trajectory management.
trajectory modeling—the automated process of
calculating a trajectory.
transfer of communication—the action taken to
transfer responsibility for communicating with an
aircraft from one controller to another.
transfer of control—the action taken to transfer the
responsibility for the separation of an aircraft from
one controller to another.
transferring controller—the air traffic controller
who initiates a handoff or point out.
transition level—the altitude at which flight levels
begin.
transmissometer—the component of a runway
visual range that determines the runway visibility.
transmissometer detector—the component of a
runway visual range that receives and measures the
transmitted light.
transmissometer projector—the light transmission
component of a runway visual range.
transmitter—the component of a radio device that
initiates communication and creates the electronic
transmission.
transponder—the airborne component of the
ATCRBS that replies to ground-based
interrogations.
Transport Canada—the Canadian Ministry with
authority and responsibility for aviation safety and
regulation. It is similar to the U.S. Department of
Transportation.
trial planning—a proposed amendment to an
aircraft’s flight track that uses automation to
analyze and display potential conflicts along the
predicted trajectory of the selected aircraft.
true airspeed—the actual speed (usually in knots) of
an aircraft relative to the airmass in which it is
flying.
true course—the actual course of the aircraft after
corrections for magnetic deviation and magnetic
variation have been applied.
true heading—the aircraft’s heading in relation to
true north.
true north—the direction from any point
along a meridian toward the true geographic
north pole.

632 / Glossary
turn and bank indicator—an outdated term used to
describe the turn coordinator.
turn coordinator—a dual purpose cockpit
instrument that displays rate of turn as well as
whether the aircraft is in a slip or skid.
ultra-high frequency (UHF)—the frequency band
between 300 and 3,000 mHz.
unassociated track—an aircraft being tracked by
either the primary or the secondary radar system
whose identity is unknown to the ARTS radar
computer system.
uncontrolled airspace—the portion of the airspace
over the United States that has not been designated
as controlled airspace. Within uncontrolled airspace
the FAA has neither the responsibility nor the
authority to exercise control over air traffic.
Variation—the difference, in degrees, between
true north and magnetic north at any particular
location.
vector—a heading issued to an aircraft by a
controller using radar to provide navigation
guidance.
vertical separation—a method of separating aircraft
operating at different altitudes while on the same
route.
very high frequency (VHF)—the frequency band
between 30 and 300 mHz.
very low frequency (VLF)—the frequency band
between 3 and 30 kHz.
VFR military training routes—routes used by the
Department of Defense and associated Reserve
and Air Guard units for conducting low-altitude
navigation and tactical training under VFR
below 10,000 feet MSL at airspeeds in excess
of 250 knots IAS.
VFR not recommended—an advisory provided by a
flight service station to a pilot during a preflight or
in-flight weather briefing that flight under visual
flight rules is not recommended. To be given when
the current and/or forecast weather conditions are
at or below VFR minimums. It does not abrogate
the pilot’s authority to make his or her own
decision.
VFR on top—ATC authorization for an IFR aircraft
to operate in VFR conditions at any appropriate
VFR altitude (as specified in FAR and as restricted
by ATC). A pilot receiving this authorization must
comply with the VFR visibility, distance from cloud
criteria, and the minimum IFR altitudes specified in
FAR 91. The use of this term does not relieve

controllers of their responsibility to separate aircraft
in Class B and Class C airspace or TRSAs as
required by FAA Order 7110.65.
VFR towers—control towers that primarily provide
airport traffic control.
VHF omnidirectional range (VOR)—a ground-based
navigation aid that transmits a VHF navigation
signal 360° in azimuth.
victor airway—see airway.
video map—an electronically displayed map on the
radar display that may depict data such as airports,
heliports, runway centerline extensions, hospital
emergency landing areas, navaids and fixes,
reporting points, airway/route centerlines,
boundaries, handoff points, special-use tracks,
obstructions, prominent geographic features, map
alignment indicators, range accuracy marks, and
minimum vectoring altitudes.
video map intensity—the control that adjusts the
intensity of the video map.
video map selector—the control that selects which
video map will be displayed.
visual approach—an approach wherein an aircraft
that is on an IFR flight plan, is operating in VFR
weather conditions, is under the control of an air
traffic control facility, and has received the
appropriate clearance may proceed visually to the
destination airport. During a visual approach, the
pilot is responsible for navigation and terrain
avoidance. The controller is responsible for air
traffic control separation. A visual approach may
be initiated by either the controller or the pilot.
visual aural range (VAR)—an outdated navigation
system that was the predecessor to the VOR.
visual flight rules (VFR)—rules that govern the
procedures for conducting flight under visual
conditions.
visual navigation—a means of navigation using
outside reference and map reading skills only.
visual separation—a means employed by controllers
to separate aircraft in terminal areas. To use visual
separation, either the controller or one of the pilots
visually separates the involved aircraft.
VLF/OMEGA—an area navigation system that uses
VLF transmitters.
voice switching system—a computer controlled
switching system that provides air traffic controllers
with all voice circuits (air to ground and ground to
ground) necessary for air traffic control.

Glossary
VOR-DME—a navigational facility providing VOR
azimuth and civilian distance measuring equipment
at one site. VORTACs can be used only by VORDME–equipped aircraft. TACAN–equipped aircraft
cannot use a VOR-DME station.
VORTAC—a navigational facility providing VOR
azimuth, TACAN azimuth, and TACAN distance
measuring equipment at one site. VORTACs can be
used by VOR-DME– or TACAN–equipped aircraft.
wake turbulence—phenomena—including vortices,
thrust stream turbulence, jet blast, and propellerand rotor-induced turbulence—resulting from the
passage of an aircraft through the atmosphere.
warning areas—international airspace within which
special operations are conducted that may be
hazardous to nonparticipating aircraft.
waveguide—hollow metallic channels that conduct
radar microwave energy to and from the antenna.

/

633

waypoint—a predetermined geographical point
defined as a bearing/distance from a VORTAC or as
a longitude/latitude coordinate.
weight class—see aircraft class.
wide area augmentation system (WAAS)—a system
of satellites and ground stations that provide GPS
signal corrections for better position accuracy over a
large geographic area.
wind correction angle—the angular course
correction angle that must be applied by the pilot to
counteract the drifting effect of a crosswind.
workload permitting—a term used within FAA
procedures that specify the importance of a
particular procedure.
world aeronautical chart—an aeronautical chart
that covers land areas of the world at a size and
scale convenient for navigation by moderate speed
aircraft scaled 1:1,000,000.

COMMON
ABBREVIATIONS
AAS
ACARS
ACC
ACC
ADF
ADIZ
AFI
AFSS
AGL
AIM
AIP
ALNOT
ALS
ALSF
ALTRV
AMB
ANDB
ANG
APPREQ
APV
ARINC
ARSA
ARSR
ARTCC
ARTS
ASD
ASDE
ASR
ATA
ATC
ATCA
ATCC
ATCRBS
ATCS

advanced automation system
Aircraft Communications Addressing and
Reporting System
Air Coordinating Committee
area control center
automatic direction finder
air defense identification zone
ICAO African-Indian Ocean Region
automated flight service station
above ground level
Aeronautical Information Manual
Aeronautical Information Publication
alert notice
approach lighting system
high-intensity approach lighting system
altitude reservation
Airways Modernization Board
Air Navigation Development Board
Air National Guard
approval request
approach with vertical guidance
Aeronautical Radio Incorporated
airport radar service area
air route surveillance radar
air route traffic control center
automated radar terminal system
aircraft situation display
airport surface detection equipment
airport surveillance radar
airport traffic area
air traffic control
Air Traffic Control Association
airway traffic control center
air traffic control radar beacon system
airway traffic control station

ATCSCC
ATCT
ATCU
ATD
ATIS
ATM
ATOPS
ATS
AZ
BAZ
BRITE
BTL
CAA
CAA
CAB
CAMI
CAR
CARF
CARs
CCC
CD
CDC
CDR
CDT
CENPAC
CENRAP
CEP
CERAP
CFCF
CNS
COP
COTS
CP
CST

Air Traffic Control System Command Center
airport traffic control tower
airway traffic control unit
actual time of departure
Automatic Terminal Information Service
air traffic management
advanced technologies and oceanic
procedures
Air Traffic Service
azimuth transmitter
back azimuth
bright radar indicator tower equipment
beacon tracking level
Civil Aeronautics Administration
Civil Aeronautics Authority
Civil Aeronautics Board
Civil Aeronautical Medical Institute
ICAO Caribbean Region
central altitude reservation function
civil air regulations
central computer complex
common digitizer
computer display channel
coded departure routes
controlled departure time
Central Pacific
central radar ARTS presentation
Central East Pacific
combined center/RAPCON
Central Flow Control Facility
communication, navigation, surveillance
changeover point
commercial off the shelf
circular polarization
controller skills test

Common Abbreviations
CUE
computer update equipment
CW
continuous wave
DARC
Direct Access Radar Channel
DAS
data acquisition subsystem
D-BRITE
digital BRITE
DEDS
data entry and display subsystem
DES
data entry sets
DH
decision height
DME
distance measuring equipment
DME/p
precision DME
DOT
Department of Transportation
DP
departure procedure
DPS
data processing subsystem
DRVSM
domestic reduced vertical separation minima
DSRs
display system replacements
DUAT
Direct User Access Terminal
DVFR
defense visual flight rules
DVOR
Doppler VOR
EARTS
en route ARTS
EBUS
Enhanced Back-Up Surveillance
ECM
electronic counter measure
EDARC
enhanced discrete address radar channel
EDCT
expect departure clearance time
EFAS
en route flight advisory service
EFC
expect further clearance
EFIS
Electronic Flight Instrument System
ELOD
en route sector loading
ELT
emergency locator transmitter
ERAM
En Route Automation Modernization
ERM
en route metering
ETA
estimated time of arrival
ETMS
Enhanced Traffic Management System
EUR
ICAO European Region
FAA
Federal Aviation Administration
FAA
Federal Aviation Agency
FAAH7110.65
Air Traffic Control Handbook
FAF
final approach fix
FARs
Federal Aviation Regulations
FCC
Federal Communications Commission
FD
facility directive
FDC
Flight Data Center
FDIO
flight data input/output
FDP
flight data processing
FIFO
flight inspection field office
FIR
flight information region
FL
flight level
FLIP
Flight Information Publication
FMS
flight management system
FPL
full performance level
FRC
full route clearance
FSDO
Flight Standards District Office
FSS
flight service station
GBAS
Ground Based Augmentation System
GNSS
Global Navigation Satellite System
GPS
Global Positioning System

GRI
HIRL
IAF
IATA
ICAO
IDENT
IFF
IFIM
IFR
IFSS
ILS
IM
IMC
INREQ
INS
INSACS
IR
JSS
LAAS
LAES
LDA
LDIN
LIRL
LLWAS
LMM
LNAV
LOA
LOM
LORAN
L/MF
LP
LPV
MACH
MALS
MALSR
MAP
MARSA
MCA
MDA
MEA
MIA
MID/ASIA
MIRL
MM
MNPSA
MOA
MOCA
MSAW
MSL
MTI
MTR
MVA

/

635

group repetition interval
high-intensity runway lighting
initial approach fix
International Air Transport Association
International Civil Aviation Organization
aircraft identification
identification friend or foe
International Flight Information Manual
instrument flight rules
international flight service station
instrument landing system
inner marker
instrument meterological conditions
information request
inertial navigation system
Interstate Airway Communication Station
IFR military training route
joint surveillance system
local area augmentation system
Landing Aids Experiment Station
localizer directional aid
lead-in lights
low-intensity runway lighting
low-level wind-shear alert system
locator middle marker
lateral navigation
letter of agreement
locator outer marker
long-range navigation
low/medium frequency
linear polarization
localizer performance with vertical guidance
mach number
medium-intensity approach lighting system
medium-intensity approach lighting system
with RAIL
missed approach point
military assumes responsibility for
separation
minimum crossing altitude
minimum descent altitude
minimum en route altitude
minimum IFR altitude
ICAO Middle East/Asia Region
medium-intensity runway lighting
middle marker
minimum navigation performance
specifications airspace
military operations area
minimum obstruction clearance altitude
minimum safe altitude warning
mean sea level
moving target indicator
military training route
minimum vectoring altitudes

636 / Common Abbreviations
NAM
NAR
NAR
NAS
NAT
NATCA
navaids
NBCAP
NDB
NEXRAD
n mi
NextGen
NOAA
NOPAC
NORAD
NOS
NOTAM
NTSB
NTZ
NWS
OACC
ODALS
ODAPS
OM
OPM
OTS
PAC
PANS
PAPI
PAR
PAR
PATCO
PBN
PCL
PDR
PIREP
PPI
PRF
PVD
QAK
RAILs
RAIM
RAPCON
RATCF
RCAG
RCC
RCLS
RCO
RDP
REILs
RL
RML

ICAO North American Region
North American Route
North Atlantic Region
National Airspace System
ICAO North Atlantic Region
National Air Traffic Controllers Association
navigation aids
National Beacon Code Allocation Plan
nondirectional radio beacon
next-generation radar
nautical mile
Next Generation Air Transportation System
National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration
Northern Pacific
North American Aerospace Defense
Command
National Ocean Service
notice to airmen
National Transportation Safety Board
no transgression zone
National Weather Service
Oceanic Area Control Centers
omnidirectional approach lighting system
Oceanic Display and Planning System
outer marker
Office of Personnel Management
NAT Organized Track System
ICAO Pacific Region
Procedures for Air Navigation Services
precision approach path indicator
precision approach radar
preferred arrival route
Professional Air Traffic Controllers
Organization
performance based navigation
pilot-controlled lighting
preferred departure routes
pilot report
plan position indicator
pulse repetition frequency
plan view display
quick action keyboard
runway alignment indicator lights
receiver autonomous integrity monitoring
radar approach control
radar air traffic control facility (USN)
remote communication air/ground
Rescue Coordination Center
runway centerline system
remote communications outlet
radar data processing
runway end identifier lights
report leaving
radar microwave link

RNAV
RNP
RTF
RVR
RVSM
RVV
SAGE
SAM
SAR
SBAS
SC-31
SED
SELCAL
SFL
SID
SIGMET
SIP
SLS
SPAN
SSALR
SSALS
SSR
STAR
STARS
STC
STMC
STMP
STOL
SVFR
SWAP
TACAN
TBO
TCAS
TDWR
TDZL
TERPS
TIS
TMC
TMS
TMU
TRACAB
TRACON
TRSA
UHF
USA
USAF
USN
UTC
UTM
VASI
VFR
VHF

area navigation
Required Navigation Performance
Radar Training Facility
runway visual range
reduced vertical separation minima
runway visibility value
semiautomated ground environment
ICAO South American Region
search and rescue
Satellite Based Augmentation System
Special Committee 31
slew entry device
selective calling system
sequenced flashing lights
standard instrument departure
significant meteorological information
special identification pulse
side lobe suppression
stored program alphanumeric
simplified short approach lighting system
with RAIL
simplified short approach lighting system
secondary surveillance radar
standard terminal arrival route
standard terminal automation replacement
system
sensitivity time control
supervisory traffic management coordinator
sector traffic management program
short takeoff and landing
special VFR
severe weather avoidance plan
tactical air navigation
trajectory-based operations
Traffic Alert and Collision Avoidance System
terminal Doppler weather radar
touchdown zone lighting
terminal instrument approach procedures
traffic information service
traffic management coordinator
traffic management system
traffic management unit
terminal radar approach control in
tower cab
terminal radar approach control
terminal radar service area
ultra-high frequency
U.S. Army
U.S. Air Force
U.S. Navy
coordinated universal time
unsuccessful transmission message
visual approach slope indicator
visual flight rules
very high frequency

Common Abbreviations
VLF
VMC
VNAV
VOR-DME

VOR
VORTAC

VR
WAAS
A
B
C
CAF
D
F
H
L
N
O
PD
Q

T

very low frequency
visual meteorological conditions
vertical navigation
collocated VOR and DME navigational
aids (VHF course and UHF distance
information)
VHF omnidirectional range
collocated VOR and TACAN navigation aids
(VHF and UHF course and UHF distance
information)
VOR approach
wide area augmentation system
cleared to airport (point of intended
landing)
ARTCC center clearance delivered
ATC clears (when clearance relayed through
non-ATC facility)
cleared as field
cleared to depart from the fix
cleared to the fix
cleared to hold and instructions issued
cleared to land
clearance not delivered
cleared to the outer marker
cleared to climb/descend at pilot’s
discretion
cleared to fly specified sectors of a navaid
defined in terms of courses, bearings, radials,
or quadrants within a designated radius
cleared through (for landing and takeoff
through intermediate point)

V
X
Z
BC
CT
FA
FMS
GPS
I
ILS
MA
MLS
NDB
OTP
PA
PT
RH
RP
RX
SA
SI
TA
TL
TR
VA
VR
WATRS

/

cleared over the fix
cleared to cross (airway, route, radial)
at (point)
tower jurisdiction
ILS back course approach
contact approach
final approach
Flight Management System Approach
GPS approach
initial approach
ILS approach
missed approach
MLS approach
nondirectional radio beacon
VFR conditions on top
precision approach
procedure turn
runway heading
report immediately upon passing
(fix/altitude)
report crossing
surveillance approach
straight-in approach
TACAN approach
turn left
turn right
visual approach
VFR military training route
West Atlantic Route System

637

REFERENCES
Books
Andrews, Alan. ABC’s of Radar. Indianapolis, I.N.:
Howard W. Sams & Co., 1966.
Berkowitz, Raymond S. Modern Radar: Analysis,
Evaluation, and System Design. New York:
John Wiley & Sons, 1965.
Carpentier, Michael H. Principles of Modern Radar
Systems. Boston: Artech House, 1988.
Clausing, Donald J. The Aviator’s Guide to Modern
Navigation. Blue Ridge Summit, P.A.: Tab
Books, 1989.
Jackson, William E. The Federal Airways System.
Institute of Electrical and Electronic
Engineers, 1970.
Pallett, E. H. J. Aircraft Instruments: Principles and
Applications. London: Pitman, 1981.
Wheeler, Gershon J. Radar Fundamentals.
Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1967.
Airport System Development. Washington, D.C.:
Office of Technology Assessment, 1984.
Avionics Fundamentals. Riverton, N.J.: IAP Inc.,
1987.
Bonfires to Beacons. Washington, D.C.: Department
of Transportation, Federal Aviation
Administration, 1978.
ICAO Annexes to the Convention on International
Civil Aviation. Montreal, Canada:
International Civil Aviation Organization.
ICAO Bulletin. Montreal, Canada: International
Civil Aviation Organization.
Safe, Separated and Soaring. Washington, D.C.:
Department of Transportation, Federal
Aviation Administration, 1980.

Takeoff at Mid Century. Washington, D.C.:
Department of Transportation, Federal
Aviation Administration, 1976.
Troubled Passage. Washington, D.C.: Department
of Transportation, Federal Aviation
Administration, 1987.
Turbulence Aloft. Washington, D.C.: Department
of Transportation, Federal Aviation
Administration, 1979.
FAA Publications
Aeronautical Information Publication, 1998.
Aeronautical Information Manual, 2000. Air Traffic
Control Facility Analysis for the Microwave
Landing System, 1985.
Air Traffic Handbook, 1989.
Airport Surveillance Radar System ASR-8, 1987.
Airport Surveillance Radar System ASR-9, 1996.
ARTS-III Data Systems Personnel Course, 1982.
ASR 4-5-6, 1969.
Automated Radar Terminal System III A, 1987.
Aviation Weather Services, 1985.
BRITE Radar Indicator Tower Equipment, 1980.
Center Weather Service Unit, 1984.
Computer Theory and Operations for Air Traffic
Control, 1973.
Data Communications, 1989.
Data Systems Specialist Course, 1980.
Direct Access Radar Channel System Instruction
Book, 1985.
En Route Stage A Flight Data Processing, 1978.
En Route Stage A Radar Data Processing, 1978.
En Route, Terminal, Flight Service Navaids, 1977.

References
Establishment and Validation of En Route Sectors,
1984.
FAA Emergency Operations Plan, 1985.
Facility Operation and Administration, 1989.
Flight Procedures and Airspace, 1984.
Flight Services Handbook, 1989.
FSAS Overview, 1985.
Holding Pattern Criteria, 1964.
ILS Localizer, 1983.
Instrument Landing System, 1967.
International Flight Information Manual, 1989.
Introduction to Computer Operation, IBM 9020,
1981.
Introduction to Radar Techniques, 1986.
Introduction to the IBM 9020 Central Computer
Complex, 1985.
Location Identifiers, 1988.
Minimum En Route IFR Altitudes over Particular
Routes and Intersections, 1988.
Moving Target Indicator, 1979.
NAS Indoctrination for Engineers and Technicians,
1985.
National Airspace System Operational Equipment,
1979.
National Airspace System Plan, 1988.
Operation Rain-Check, 1988.
Planning Guide for Airport and Airway ATC
Facilities and Services, 1986.
Procedures for Handling Airspace Matters, 1984.
Radar Antennas, 1984.
Rotorcraft Master Plan, 1985.
Secondary Surveillance Radar, 1967.
Siting Criteria for Instrument Landing Systems,
1985.
Studies of Poststrike Air Traffic Control Specialist
Trainees, 1988.
Terminal Arrival Area Design Criteria, 1997.
Terminal Basic Air Traffic Manual, 1981.
United States Standard for Terminal Instrument
Procedures, 1986.
VOR Orientation, 1971.
Wake Turbulence, 1975.
FAA Advisory Circulars
AC 20-121 Airworthiness Approval of Airborne
Loran- C Systems for Use in the U.S.
National Airspace System.

AC 73-2

/

639

IFR Helicopter Operations in the
Northeast Corridor.
AC 90-5 Coordination of Air Traffic Control
Procedures and Criteria.
AC 90-23 Aircraft Wake Turbulence.
AC 90-43 Operations Reservations for HighDensity Traffic Airports.
AC 90-45 Approval of Area Navigation Systems
for Use in the U.S. National Airspace
System.
AC 90-50 VHF Radiofrequency Assignment Plan
for Aeronautical Operations.
AC 90-65 Air Traffic Fuel Economy Program.
AC 90-67 Light Signals from the Control Tower
for Ground Vehicles, Equipment and
Personnel.
AC 90-72 Minimum Safe Altitude Warning.
AC 90-76 Flight in Oceanic Airspace.
AC 90-78 En Route Conflict Alert.
AC 90-79 Recommended Practices and Procedures
for the Use of Electronic Long Range
Navigation Equipment.
AC 90-82 Random Area Navigation Routes.
AC 90-83 Terminal Control Areas.
AC 90-85 Severe Weather Avoidance Plan.
AC 90-88 Airport Radar Service Area.
AC 91-14 Altimeter Setting Sources.
AC 91-49 General Aviation Procedures for Flight
Within the North Atlantic MNPS
Airspace.
AC 91-50 Importance of Transponder Operation
and Altitude Reporting.
AC 97-1 Runway Visual Range.
AC 99-1 Security Control of Air Traffic.
AC 120-26 ICAO Designator Assignment for
Aircraft Operating Agencies.
AC 120-33 Operational Approval of Airborne
Long-Range Navigational Systems for
Flight Within the North Atlantic MNPS
Airspace.
AC 170-13 Approach Lighting System
Configurations and Energy
Conservation.
AC 210-5 Military Flying Activities.
AC 211-2 Recommended Standards for IFR
Aeronautical Charts.

PHOTO CREDITS

This page constitutes an extension of the copyright page. We
have made every effort to trace the ownership of all copyrighted material and to secure permission from copyright
holders. In the event of any question arising as to the use
of any material, we will be pleased to make the necessary
corrections in future printings.
Chapter 1.
5: FAA 6: FAA 7: FAA 9: Michael Nolan 11: FAA 14: FAA
19: FAA 21: Journal of Air Traffic Control 23: FAA 30: FAA
35: FAA
Chapter 2.
51: Beech Aircraft Corporation 52: Beech Aircraft Corporation 54: Michael Nolan 55, left: Beech Aircraft Corporation
55, left center: Beech Aircraft Corporation 55, right: Beech
Aircraft Corporation 55, right center: Beech Aircraft Corporation 58: Beech Aircraft Corporation 61: Wadsworth,
Inc. Photo by Paul Bowen Photography, Inc. 63, left: Bendix/
King Division of Allied Signal Aerospace Company 63, right:
Bendix/King Division of Allied Signal Aerospace Company
67: FAA 74: E-Systems, Montek Division 75: E-Systems,
Montek Division 79: Bendix/King Division of Allied Signal Aerospace Company 82: II Morrow Inc. 86: Garmin,
Inc. 89: Delco Systems Operations, Delco Electronics Corporation 104: Michael Nolan 106: Bendix/King Division
of Allied Signal Aerospace Company 113: Michael Nolan
115, top: Bendix/King Division of Allied Signal Aerospace
Company 115, bottom: Bendix/King Division of Allied Signal Aerospace Company 124: Michael Nolan 127: Michael
Nolan 128: Michael Nolan 130: FAA 133: Michael Nolan
134: Michael Nolan

Chapter 4.
200, left: Qualimetrics, Inc. 200, right: Qualimetries, Inc.
Chapter 5.
221: Michael Nolan 222: Michael Nolan
Chapter 8.
324: Westinghouse Corporation 330: UNISYS Corporation
332: FAA 333: FAA 343: ITT Gilfillan Division 345: ITT
Gilfillan Division 346: Michael Nolan 349: Norden Systems
Division of United Technologies 359: FAA 360: Michael
Nolan 365: UNISYS Corporation 371: (FAA) 372: FAA
376: FAA 377: FAA 378: FAA
Chapter 9.
385: FAA 413: FAA 414: FAA 415: FAA
Chapter 10.
430: FAA 432: FAA 434: Michael Nolan 438: FAA 441:
FAA 458: FAA
Chapter 11.
473: FAA 473: FAA 478: FAA 479: FAA 480 FAA 481: FAA
482: FAA 483: FAA
Chapter 12.
490: FAA 493: FAA 497: FAA 501: Dimensions International 502: Dimensions International 503: Dimensions
International
Chapter 13.
509: FAA 512: FAA 518: Michael Nolan 520: FAA 521:
Michael Nolan

INDEX
A
AAR (airport acceptance rate),
420, 489
AAS (Advanced Automation
System), 36
Abbreviations, standard, 218–219
Above ground level (AGL), 140
ACC (Air Coordinating
Committee), 18–19
Acceleration errors, 52
Active control, 13
ADF (automatic direction finder),
58–59
ADIZ (Air Defense Identification
Zone), 185–186, 225–227
ADS (automatic dependent
surveillance), 492, 504–505
ADS-C (automatic dependent
surveillance-contract), 505
Advanced Automation System
(AAS), 36
Advanced technologies and
oceanic procedures (ATOPS),
480
Advisory database system, 422
Aeronautical charts, 46–49
AGL (above ground level), 140
Air Commerce Act, 3–4
Air Coordinating Committee
(ACC), 18–19
Aircraft categories, 256, 275
Aircraft group, 264–265

Aircraft identification, 206–210,
382–386
Aircraft instrumentation, 49,
51–52
Aircraft list and plans display,
377
Aircraft positioning methods, 67,
69–75
Aircraft spacing, 266–270
Air defense, 38
Air Defense Identification Zone
(ADIZ), 185–186, 225–227
Airline Deregulation Act (1978),
33–34
Airmail service, 2–3, 45
Air Navigation Conferences, 464
Air Navigation Development
Board (ANDB), 20
Airport acceptance rate (AAR),
420, 489
Airport advisory areas, 187
Airport boundary lighting, 53
Airport identifiers, 467–469
Airport movement areas, 238
Airport radar service areas
(ARSAs), 169–172
Airport surface detection
equipment (ASDE), 348–351
Airport surveillance radar (ASR),
20, 344–348
Airport surveillance radar (ASR)
approach, 405–408

Air route surveillance radar
(ARSR), 23, 347–348
Air Route Traffic Control Centers
(ARTCC), 37, 221, 524
Airspace classification
airport advisory areas, 187
airway dimensions, 180
chart of, 156–162
Class A, 163–165
Class B, 165–169
Class C, 169–172
Class D, 172–174
Class E, 174–176
Class F, 182
Class G, 182–184
clearance, 144–153
federal airways, 176
flight levels, 176–180
high-altitude redesign (HAR)
project, 180–181
IFR flight, 141–144, 153
military training routes, 187–
188
navigation reference system,
181–182
nonregulatory special use,
186–187
overview, 139–141
special use airspace, 139, 140,
184–186
tango routes, 182
VFR flight, 153–154

642 / Index
Airspace dimensions, 283–285
Airspace system, future trends
air traffic management, 497–506
automated air traffic control,
486–488
CNS improvements, 491–497
departure delay program, 489
en route metering program,
489–490
en route sector loading
program, 490
procedural changes, 491
Airspeed, holding patterns,
295–296
Airspeed indicator, 55
Air taxiing, 271
Air traffic control. See also
Control tower procedures
air defense identification zones
(ADIZs), 225–227
air traffic management, future
trends, 497–506
automation of, 486–488
CNS improvements, 491–497
control tower, 237–239
delegation of responsibility,
229–236
departure delay program, 489
en route, history of, 11–14
en route metering program,
489–490
en route sector loading
program, 490
foreign air traffic control, 228
history of, 4–10
military use of civilian airspace,
224–225
overview, 224
private facilities, 228–229
procedural changes, future, 491
Air traffic control, history of
1903–1925, 2–3
1925–1934, 3–10
1934–1945, 10–19
1945–155, 19–22
1955–1965, 22–31
1965–1981, 31–36
1981–2001, 36–41
Air Traffic Control Association
(ATCA), 26, 30

Air traffic control clearance,
144–153
Air Traffic Control facilities,
identifying, 203
Air traffic controllers. See also
Careers
history of, 5–7
staffing, 40–41
unionization, 30–31
Air traffic control radar beacon
system (ATCRBS), 351–359
Air Traffic Control System
Command Center (ATCSCC),
37, 420
Air traffic control tower (ATCT),
222, 237–239. See also
Control tower procedures
Air traffic management (ATM)
systems, 40
Air Traffic Organization (ATO),
512, 514
Air Traffic Selection and Training
(AT-SAT), 515
Airway designators, 67
Airway dimensions, 180
Airway facility technicians, 107
Airway traffic control centers
(ATCCs), 16
Airway traffic control stations
(ATCSs), 14
Airway traffic control units
(ATCUs), 11
Alert area, 186
Alert notice (ALNOT), 461
ALSF-1, 128
ALSF-2, 128–129
Altimeter, 55, 199
Altitude
assignment of, 148
minimum safe altitude warning
(MSAW), 369, 413–415
minimum vectoring altitudes,
401
navigation systems, 66–67
radio communication, 197
verification of, 386
vertical separation, 285–290
Altitude assignments, 211–214
Altitude encoders, 355
Altitude filtering, 366, 368

AM (amendment message), 248
Amendment message (AM), 248
ANDB (Air Navigation
Development Board), 20
Antenna, radar, 323–324
Anticipated separation, 260
Application process, 518
APPREAQ (approval requests),
234, 236
Approach
ASR approach, 405–408
control tower and, 239
GPS-based, 120–121
IFR example, 445–451
instrument procedures,
92–100
low approach, 269–270
procedures, 121–122
radar and, 401–408
VFR example, 456, 458–460
Approach gate, 403
Approach lighting, 123–136
Approach plates, 93
Approval requests (APPREQ),
234, 236
Area navigation. See also
Navigation systems
course-line computers, 77–79
Doppler radar, 75–77
LORAN, 79–83
overview, 75
Arrival gates, 445
Arrivals, 260–265, 401–408
ARSAs (airport radar service
areas), 169–172
ARSR (air route surveillance
radar), 23, 347–348
ARTCC (Air Route Traffic
Control Centers), 37, 221,
524
Artificial horizon, 55
ARTS (automated radar terminal
system), 248, 361–372
ASDE (airport surface detection
equipment), 348–351
ASR (airport surveillance radar),
20, 344–348
ASR (airport surveillance radar)
approach, 405–408
Associated tracks, 366

Index
ATCA (Air Traffic Control
Association), 26, 30
ATCCs (airway traffic control
centers), 16
ATC modernization, 39–40
ATCRBS (air traffic control radar
beacon system), 351–359
ATCSCC (Air Traffic Control
System Control Center), 37,
420
ATCSs (airway traffic control
stations), 14
ATC system, 39
ATCT (air traffic control tower),
222, 237–239. See also
Control tower procedures
ATCUs (airway traffic control
units), 11
ATIS (Automatic Terminal
Information Service), 249
Atlantic ocean air traffic control
ATOPS, 480
MNPS airspace operations,
472–477
MNPS airspace separation,
477–480
North Atlantic separation,
471–472
overview, 470–471
trans-polar flights, 480–484
ATM (air traffic management)
systems, 40
Atmospheric pressure, 177
ATO (Air Traffic Organization),
512, 514
ATOPS (advanced technologies
and oceanic procedures), 480
AT-SAT (Air Traffic Selection and
Training), 515
Attitude indicator, 55
Autoland devices, 116
Automated air traffic control,
486–488
Automated handoffs, 368
Automated radar terminal system
(ARTS), 248, 361–372
Automatic dependent surveillance
(ADS), 492, 504–505
Automatic dependent surveillance
contract (ADS-C), 505

Automatic direction finder (ADF),
58–59
Automatic Terminal Information
Service (ATIS), 249
Autorotation, 272
Aviation academics, 519
Aviation Noise Abatement Policy,
270–271
B
Beacon data acquisition system
(BDAS), 364
Beacons
BDAS (beacon data
acquisition system), 364
marker, 57–58, 112, 114
National Beacon Code
Allocation Plan (NBCAP),
245, 375
nondirectional, 58
Beacon slash, 354, 384
Bins, 413
Blind speed, 335
Blip, radar, 327
Boresight, 324
Bureau of Air Commerce, 10–11
C
CAA (Civil Aeronautics
Administration), 16
CAA (Civil Aeronautics
Authority), 15–16
CAB (Civil Aeronautics Board), 16
CAF (cleared as filed), 211
Calm wind runway, 270
Canadian Air Traffic Control,
465–466
Careers
air traffic control facilities,
523–534
FAA administrative structure,
508–514
hiring process, 515–519
salaries, 519–523
CARs (civil air regulations), 16
Category I approach, 121–122
Category II or III approach,
121–122
CATM (collaborative air traffic
management), 500–503

/

643

CCC (central computer complex),
374
CDC (computer display channel),
375
CDI (course deviation indicator),
62–63
CDM (Collaborative Decision
Making), 501–503
CDR (coded departure routes),
418–420, 431–433
CDRS (continuous data recording
subsystem), 366
CENPAC (central Pacific),
478–480
Center radar ARTS presentation
(CENRAP), 379
Central computer complex
(CCC), 374
Central Flow Control Facility
(CFCF), 35
Central Pacific (CENPAC),
478–480
CERAP (Combined Control
Facility), 524
Certified controllers, 515
CFCF (Central Flow Control
Facility), 35
Chain, transmitter stations, 81
Challenge pulse, 352
Chief Operating Officer (COO),
514
Circular polarization (CP),
338–339
Civil Aeronautics Act (1938),
15–16
Civil Aeronautics Administration
(CAA), 16
Civil Aeronautics Authority
(CAA), 15–16
Civil Aeronautics Board (CAB), 16
Civil air regulations (CARs), 16
Class A airspace, 163–165
Class B airspace, 165–169
Class C airspace, 169–172
Class D airspace, 172–174
Class E airspace, 174–176
Class F airspace, 182
Class G airspace, 182–184
CLC (course-line computer),
77–79

644 / Index
Clearance
IFR example, 424–429
land and hold short operations
(LAHSO), 265–266
phraseology, 205–206, 258–
259
spacing instructions, 269–270
vectors, 400–401
visual separation, 315–317
Clearance delivery controller,
238–239, 250–251, 424–429
Cleared as filed (CAF), 211
Cleared to land, 269
Clear zone, 109
Clutter map, 336
CNF (Computer Navigation Fix),
120–121
CNS (communication navigation
surveillance), 40, 491–497
Coast list, 368
Coded departure routes (CDR),
418–420, 431–433
Collaborative air traffic
management (CATM),
500–503
Collaborative Decision Making
(CDM), 501–503
Collegiate Training Initiative
(CTI), 515–517
Colored airways, 59
Colors, rotating beacons, 53–54
Combination Nonradar
Approach Control and Tower
with Radar, 524
Combination Radar Approach
Control and Tower with
Radar, 523–524
Combined Control Facility
(CERAP), 524
Combined TRACON Facility,
524
Commercial off the shelf (COTS)
systems, 37
Common ARTS, 371–372
Communication
aircraft identification, 206–210
altitude assignments, 211–214
clearance, 205–206, 258–259
departure, 210, 247–248,
256–260

destination airport, 210
holding instructions, 215–217
improvements, 491–494
overview, 191
radio, 191–195
required reports, 214
route of flight, 211
standard abbreviations, 217–
219
transfer of, 230, 233, 368,
388–389, 438–442
verbal, standard phraseology,
195–204
Communication navigation,
surveillance (CNS) systems,
40, 491–497
Compass deviation card, 51–52
Compass locators, 59, 114
Computer display channel
(CDC), 375
Computerized radar systems,
360–361. See also Radar
Computer Navigation Fix (CNF),
120–121
Conflict Alert, 368–369, 411
Conflict Alert IFR/VFR Mode C
Intruder, 369
Conflict probes, 499
Conflict resolution, 458–459
Congestion, air traffic, 20–22,
24–25
Contact approach, 92. See also
Approach
Continuous data recording
subsystem (CDRS), 366
Continuous wave (CW) radar,
320
Controlled airspace. See also
Airspace classification
clearance, controlled airspace,
144–153
defined, 16, 139
IFR flight in, 141–144
separation responsibilities,
221–223
VFR flight, 153–155
Controlled firing areas,
186–187
Controlled VFR (CVFR), 465
Controller duties, 237

Controller–pilot data link
communications (CPDLC),
493
Control tower procedures
clearance delivery controller
duties, 250–251
flight data controller duties,
242–250
future changes, 491
ground controller duties,
252–255
handoff, 230, 233, 368,
387–389, 438–442
helicopter operations,
271–272
local controller duties,
256–271
merging-target procedures,
387–389
military use of civilian airspace,
224–225
overview, 224, 242
point out procedures, 389–390
wake turbulence, 272–278
Control Tower with Radar, 524
Convention on International Civil
Aviation, 464
COO (Chief Operating Officer),
514
Coordinated universal time
(UTC), 198
Coordination, 388–389
Copeland committee, 14–15
COTS (commercial off the shelf)
system, 37
Course, 46
Course deviation indicator (CDI),
62–63
Course-line computer (CLC),
77–79
Course scalloping, 104
CP (circular polarization),
338–339
CPDLC (controller–pilot data
link communications), 493
Critical areas, 255
Cross at, 213
Crosswind correction angle, 46
Cruise clearance, 212–213. See
also Clearance

Index
CTI (Collegiate Training
Initiative), 515–517
CW (continuous wave) radar, 320
D
DASR (digital airport surveillance
radar), 346–347
Data acquisition subsystem
(DAS), 364
Data block, ARTS, 362
Data converter, 119
Data entry and display subsystem
(DEDS), 364–365
Data entry sets (DES), 365
Data link, 492–493
Data processing subsystem (DPS),
364
Dead reckoning, 49
Decenter, sweep, 341
Decision height (DH), 96, 197
DEDS (data entry and display
subsystem), 364–365
Deduced reckoning, 46
Degree-divergence chart, 293
Delay techniques, 443–445
Delegation of responsibility,
229–236
Demand chart, 421
Department of Transportation
(DOT), 31–32, 508. See
also FAA (Federal Aviation
Administration)
Departure
coded departure routes, 431–
433
control tower, 239
departure control, 435–438
departure delay program, 489
IFR, coded routes, 418–420
instructions, 210, 243–248,
256–260
separation, 309–315, 397–399
Departure controller, 435–438
Departure gates, 445
Departure procedure (DP), 144
Deregulation, airlines, 33–34
DES (data entry sets), 365
Destination airport, 210
Deviations, 51–52
DH (decision height), 96, 197

Digital airport surveillance radar
(DASR), 346–347
Direction finder, 58
Display system replacements
(DSRs), 37, 375–376
Distance measuring equipment
(DME), 20, 70–72
Divergence, 293, 308
DME (distance measuring
equipment), 20, 70–72
Domestic reduced vertical
separation minima (DRVSM),
391–392
Doppler effect, 77
Doppler radar, 75–77
Doppler VOR (DVOR), 65–66
DOT (Department of
Transportation), 32–33,
508. See also FAA (Federal
Aviation Administration)
Double bloomer, 355
DP (departure procedure), 144
DPS (data processing subsystem),
364
DRVSM (domestic reduced
vertical separation minima),
391–392
DSRs (display system
replacements), 37, 375–376
Duplex communications, 192
Duplexer, 322
DVOR (Doppler VOR), 65–66
E
EARTS, 393–394
EBUS (Enhanced Back-Up and
Surveillance), 379
Echo, radar, 324
EDARC (enhanced discrete
address radar channel), 374
EDCT (expect departure
clearance time), 423
Edge lights, runway, 123
Education programs, 515–517
EFAS (en route flight advisory
service), 456
EFC (expect further clearance),
150, 215–217
Electronic navigation. See also
Navigation systems

/

645

airway altitudes, 66–67
automatic direction finder,
58–59
compass locators, 59
four-course radio range, 56–58
nondirectional beacons, 58
VHF omnidirectional range
(VOR), 60–66
visual aural range, 59–60
ELOD (en route sector loading
program), 490
Emergency locator transmitter
(ELT), 461
Enhanced Back-Up and
Surveillance (EBUS), 379
Enhanced discrete address radar
channel (EDARC), 374
Enhanced Traffic Management
System (ETMS), 37
En Route Automation
Modernization (ERAM), 40,
377–379, 505–506
En route flight advisory service
(EFAS), 456
En route metering program,
489–490
En route sector loading program
(ELOD), 490
En route separation, 438–442
Equivalent visual approach, 500
ERAM (En Route Automation
Modernization), 40, 377–
379, 505–506
ETMS (Enhanced Traffic
Management System), 37
European Air Traffic Control,
469–470
Expect departure clearance time
(EDCT), 423
Expect further clearance (EFC),
150, 215–217
Extend downwind/upwind, 267
F
FAA Academy, 518–519
FAA (Federal Aviation
Administration)
administrative structure,
508–514
careers in, 515–519

646 / Index
FAA (continued)
facility classifications, 523–541
history of, 32
responsibilities of, 221
salaries, 519–523
September 11 events, 38
Facility classifications, 523–541
Facility directives, 230
FAF (final approach fix), 93
False courses, 104
False glide path, 112
FCA (flow constrained areas), 424
FCC (Federal Communication
Commission), 193
FDC (Flight Data Center), 418
FDIO (flight data input/output),
243–246, 247–248
FDP (flight data processing), 29,
246–248, 361
Federal airways, 140, 176
Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA)
administrative structure,
508–514
careers in, 515–519
facility classification, 523–541
history of, 25–27, 32
responsibilities of, 221
salaries, 519–523
September 11 events, 38
Federal Communication
Commission (FCC), 193
Feedhorn, 324
Fields, flight strips, 243
Final approach fix (FAF), 93
Final approach segment, 95
Final controller, 450
FIRs (flight information regions),
228, 466–469
Fixed position surveillance model
20 (FPS-20), 347
Fix end reduction area, 298–299
Flight checks, 93
Flight Data Center (FDC), 418
Flight data controller, 237,
242–250
Flight data input/output (FDIO),
243–246, 247–248
Flight data processing (FDP), 29,
246–248, 361

Flight information regions (FIRs),
228, 466–469
Flight information services
(FIS-B), 505
Flight levels, 176–180, 177, 197
Flight planning, 49
Flight progress strips, 243
Flight Restricted Zone (FRZ),
185–186
Flight service station (FSS), 18,
418, 540–541
Flow constrained areas (FCA), 424
Flow control, 35
Foreign air traffic control, 228
Formal runway use program, 271
Four-course radio range, 56–58
FPL (full performance level)
controllers, 519
Framing pulse, 352
Free flight, 488
Frequency, radar, 329
Frequency assignments, radio,
193–194
Frequency shift, 77
Fresnel lens, 123
FRZ (flight restricted zone),
185–186
FSSs (flight service stations), 18,
418, 540–541
Full performance level (FPL)
controllers, 519
Full route clearance, 429
Full-scale deflection, 102
G
Gain, radar, 330
GBAS (Ground-Based
Augmentation System),
87–88
Geo-Map, 337
Glide path, 96
Glide slope, 109, 111–112
Glide slope critical area, 112
Glide slope monitors, 112
Global Navigation Satellite
System (GNSS), 84, 87
Global Positioning System (GPS),
84–86, 97, 120–121
GMT (Greenwich mean time),
198

GNSS (Global Navigation
Satellite System), 84, 87
Go around, 268–269
GPS (Global Positioning System),
84–86, 97, 120–121
Graphic plan display, 377
Gray scale, 355
Greenwich mean time (GMT), 198
GRI (group repetition interval), 81
Ground-Based Augmentation
System (GBAS), 87–88
Ground clutter, radar, 328
Ground controller, 238–239,
252–255, 431–433, 453–455
Ground taxiing, 271
Ground track, 46
Ground wave, 83
Group repetition interval (GRI),
81
H
Handoff procedures, 230, 233,
368, 387–389, 438–442
HAR (high-altitude redesign)
project, 180–181
Heading indicator, 52
Headings, pronunciation for, 201
Heavy aircraft, 275
Helicopter operations, 271–272
High-altitude EFAS, 456
High-altitude redesign (HAR)
project, 180–181
High-altitude VORs, 64
High-intensity runway lighting
(HIRL), 124–125
Hijackings, 38, 227
HIRL (high-intensity runway
lighting), 124–125
History, air traffic control
1981–2001, 36–41
aviation, 1903–1925, 2–3
aviation, 1925–1934, 3–10
aviation, 1934–1945, 10–19
aviation, 1945–1955, 19–22
aviation, 1955–1965, 22–31
aviation, 1965–1981, 31–36
History, radar echoes, 328
HOCSR (host and oceanic
computer system
replacement), 374

Index
Holding instructions, 215–217
Holding patterns, 215–217,
294–300
Holding-pattern templates, 296
Holding short, 253
Homing, 58
Horizon, artificial, 55
Host and oceanic computer
system replacement
(HOCSR), 374
Hover taxiing, 271
Hyperbolic navigation system,
79–83
I
IAFs (initial approach fixes), 93
IAP (instrument approach
procedures), 92–100
IATA (International Air Transport
Association), 467
IATCB (Interdepartmental Air
Traffic Control Board), 18
ICAO (International Civil
Aviation Organization),
18–19, 464–465
Identification friend or foe (IFF),
352
IFIM (International Flight
Information Manual), 465
IFR (instrument flight rules)
alternative routes, 424
approach, 429, 445–451
clearance delivery, 424–429
coded departure routes, 418–
420
controlled airspace, clearance,
153
delay techniques, 443–445
departure control, 243–246,
435–438
en route separation, 438–442
establishment of, 10–11
flight in controlled airspace,
141–144
flight in uncontrolled airspace,
153, 183–184
flight planning and clearance,
418
ground control coded departure
routes, 431–433

local control, 433–435, 451–
453
metering, 443
miles in trail restrictions, 443
traffic flow management
programs, 420–423
ILS (instrument landing system),
20, 102–120
IM (inner marker) beacons, 114
IMCs (instrument meteorological
conditions), 10
Inactive runways, 252–255
Indicated airspeed, 296
Indicator, radar, 325–328
Inertial navigation system (INS),
89–90
Informal runway use programs,
270–271
Information request (INREQ),
460–461
Initial approach fixes (IAFs), 93
Initial approach segment, 93. See
also Approach
Initial separation procedures,
308–315. See also Separation
Inner marker (IM) beacons, 114
INREQ (information request),
460–461
INSACSs (interstate airway
communication stations), 18
INS (inertial navigation system),
89–90
Instrument approach procedures
(IAP), 92–100
Instrumentation, aircraft, 49,
51–52
Instrument flight rules (IFR). See
IFR (instrument flight rules)
Instrument flying, 9–10, 55
Instrument landing system (ILS),
20, 102–120
Instrument meteorological
conditions (ICMs), 10
Interdepartmental Air Traffic
Control Board (IATCB), 18
Intermediate approach segment, 93
Intermediate fix, 210
International airspace, 466–469.
See also Ocean air traffic
control

/

647

International Air Transport
Association (IATA), 467
International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO), 18–19,
464–465
International Flight Information
Manual (IFIM), 465
International Standards and
Recommended Practices,
464–465
Interrogator, 71
Intersecting runways, 259, 263–
265, 314–315, 397–399
Interstate airway communication
stations (INSACSs), 18
J
Jet advisory areas, 163
K
Knots, wind speed, 200–201
L
LAAS (local area augmentation
system), 88
LAES (Landing Aids Experiment
Station), 126
LAHSO (land and hold short
operations), 265–266
Landing Aids Experiment Station
(LAES), 126
Landing procedures, 121–122.
See also Approach
Large aircraft, 275
Lateral Navigation (LNAV),
121–122
Lateral Navigation/Vertical
Navigation (LNAV/VNAV)
approach, 121–122
Lateral separation, 290–294,
395–397, 472, 477
LDA (localizer directional aid), 107
League, Archie W., 5–6
Left traffic, 261
Letter of agreement (LOA), 222
Letters, standard phraseology,
195–197
Light guns, 7–8
Lighting, airport boundary, 53.
See also Beacons

648 / Index
Lindbergh, Charles, 4
Linear polarization (LP), 338–
339
LIRL (low-intensity runway
lighting), 124
LMM (locator middle marker),
114
LNAV (lateral navigation)
approach, 121–122
LNAV/VNAV approach,
121–122
LOA (letter of agreement), 222
Local area augmentation system
(LAAS), 88
Local controller
arriving aircraft, 260–265
IFR example, 433–435,
451–453
land and hold short operations
(LAHSO), 265–266
responsibilities, 239
runway selection, 270
runway separation duties,
256–260
runway use programs, 270–271
spacing aircraft, 266–270
VFR example, 460
Localizer, 102–109
Localizer back course, 107, 109
Localizer critical area, 107
Localizer directional aid (LDA),
107
Localizer Performance with
Vertical Guidance (LPV),
121–122
Locator middle marker (LMM),
114
Locator outer marker (LOM),
114
Longitudinal separation, 300–
308, 392–395, 472, 477–478
Long-range navigation (LORAN),
79–83
Low-altitude VORs, 64
Low approach, 269–270
Low-intensity runway lighting
(LIRL), 124
LP (linear polarization), 338–339
LPV (localizer performance with
vertical guidance), 121–122

M
Magnetic compass, 49, 51–52
Magnetic heading, 50–51
Magnetic north, 49, 51–52
Main bang, radar, 325–326
Maintain VFR, 212
Make left (or right), 267–268
MALSR, 130–131
MAP (missed approach point), 95
Maps, 46–49
Marker beacons, 57–58, 112,
114, 245, 364, 375
MARSA (military authority
assumes responsibility for
separation of aircraft),
224–225
Master station, 80
Maximum holding airspeeds, 295
MDA (minimum descent
altitude), 95–96, 197
MEA (minimum en route
altitude), 66–67, 69, 148
MEARTS (microprocessor en
route automated radar
tracking system), 379
Medical examination, 517
Medium-intensity approach
lighting system with RAIL
(MALSR), 130–131
Medium-intensity runway
lighting (MIRL), 124
Merge/tracking, radar, 337
Merging-target procedures,
410–412
Metering, 443
Microprocessor en route
automated radar tracking
system (MEARTS), 379
Microwave landing system
(MLS), 202–203
Middle marker (MM) beacons,
112, 114
Miles in trail (MIT), 443
Military air traffic control
history of, 18–23
identification prefixes, 209–210
LORAN, 80–83
military use of civilian airspace,
224–225
navigation systems, 74–75

Military authority assumes
responsibility for separation of
aircraft (MARSA), 224–225
Military operations area
(MOA), 186
Military training route (MTR),
187–188
Millibars, 199
Minimum descent altitude
(MDA), 95–96, 197
Minimum en route altitude
(MEA), 66–67, 69, 148
Minimum navigation
performance specifications
airspace
(MNPSA), 471
Minimum obstruction clearance
altitudes (MOCAs), 67, 69
Minimum safe altitude warning
(MSAW), 369, 413–415
Minimum vectoring altitudes, 401
MIRL (medium-intensity runway
lighting), 124
Missed approach point (MAP), 95
Missed approach procedure, 96
Missed approach segment, 96
MIT (miles in trail), 443
MLS (microwave landing system),
202–203
MM (middle marker) beacons,
112, 114
MMR (multi mode receivers), 91
MNPS airspace operations,
472–477
MNPSA (minimum navigation
performance specification
airspace), 471
MOA (military operations area),
186
MOCAs (minimum obstruction
clearance altitudes), 67, 69
Mode C operation, 386, 413, 435
Modernization program, 36–37,
39–40
Mode-S, ATCRBS system, 357–
358
Morrow Report, 3
Morse code, 57
Moving target detection (MTD),
336–337

Index
Moving target indicator (MTI),
330–335
MSAW (minimum safe altitude
warning), 369, 413–415
MTI gate, 335
MTI/MTD video gain, 339–340
MTR (military training route),
187–188
Multi mode receivers
(MMR), 91
N
NAFEC (National Aviation
Facilities Experimental
Center), 26
NAR (National Airspace Review),
140–141
NAR (North Atlantic Region)
MNPS airspace operations,
472–477
MNPS airspace separation,
477–480
overview, 470–471
Pacific flight rules, 478–480
trans-polar flights, 480–484
NAS-A, 393–394
NATCA (National Air Traffic
Controllers Association), 36
National Airspace Review
(NAR), 140–141
National Airspace System, 37
National Airspace System state A
(NAS-A), 373
National Air Traffic Controllers
Association (NATCA), 36
National Association of Air
Traffic Specialists (NAATS),
30
National Association of
Government Employees
(NAGE), 30
National Aviation Facilities
Experimental Center
(NAFEC), 26
National Beacon Code Allocation
Plan (NBCAP), 245, 375
National Ocean Service, 46. See
also Ocean air traffic control
National Route Program (NRP),
491

National security areas (NSAs),
187
National Transportation Safety
Board (NTSB), 32
National Weather Service (NWS),
248–250
Navigation aids (navaids), 4. See
also Navigation systems
description of, 204
instrument landing system,
102–120
terminal VOR, 101–102
Navigation reference system,
181–182
Navigation security, 495–496
Navigation systems. See also
Navigation aids (navaids)
aircraft instrumentation, 49,
51–52
aircraft positioning methods,
67, 69–75
airway altitudes, 66–67
approach and landing
procedures, 121–122
approach navigation aid
classifications, 101–120
area navigation, overview, 75
automatic direction finder,
58–59
compass locators, 59
course-line computers, 77–79
Doppler radar, 75–77
four-course radio range, 56–58
Global Navigation Satellite
System (GNSS), 84, 87
Global Positioning System
(GPS), 84–86, 97, 120–121
Ground-Based Augmentation
System (GBAS), 87–88
history, 45
improvements, 491, 494–497
inertial navigation system
(INS), 89–90
instrument approach
procedures (IAP), 92–100
instrument flying, 55
LORAN, 79–83
nondirectional beacons, 58
performance-based navigation
(PBN), 90

/

649

radar-assisted navigation,
399–401
receiver autonomous integrity
monitoring (RAIM), 86
Required Navigation
Performance (RNP), 90–91
runway and approach lighting,
123–136
special aircraft and aircrew
authorization required
(SAAAR), 92
trans-polar flights, 482–484
VFR navigation, 53–54
VHF omnidirectional range
(VOR), 60–66
visual aural range, 59–60
visual navigation, 46–49
NBCAP (National Beacon Code
Allocation Plan), 245, 375
Negotiated routes, 503–504
Next Generation Air
Transportation System
(NextGen), 36–37, 498–500
Night differential, 521
Noise, electronic, 325
Nondirectional beacons, 58. See
also Beacons
Nonprecision approach, 95–96,
121–122. See also Approach
Non-radar-approach control
towers, 242
Nonradar controller, 237
Nonregulatory special use
airspace, 186–187
NOPAC (northern Pacific),
478–480
Normal video gain, 339–340
North American Aerospace
Defense Command
(NORAD), 38
North Atlantic Region (NAR)
MNPS airspace operations,
472–477
MNPS airspace separation,
477–480
overview, 470–471
Pacific flight rules, 478–480
trans-polar flights, 480–484
Northern Pacific (NOPAC),
478–480

650 / Index
NOTAM (notice to airmen), 185,
418
Notice to airmen (NOTAM), 185,
418
NRP (National Route Program),
491
NSAs (national security areas),
187
NTSB (National Transportation
Safety Board), 32
Numbers, standard phraseology,
195–197
NWS (National Weather Service),
248–250
O
OACC (Oceanic Area Control
Centers), 472
OBS (omni bearing selector), 62
Ocean air traffic control
ATOPS/Ocean 21, 480
MNPS airspace operations,
472–477
MNPS airspace separation,
477–480
North Atlantic separation,
471–472
overview, 470–471
Pacific flight rules,
478–480
trans-polar flights, 480–484
Oceanic Area Control Centers
(OACC), 472
ODALSs (omnidirectional
approach lighting systems),
133
Office of the Secretary of
Transportation (OST),
508. See also FAA (Federal
Aviation Administration)
Omni bearing selector (OBS), 62
Omnidirectional approach
lighting systems (ODALSs),
133
OM (outer marker) beacons,
112, 114
Option clearance, 270
Outer marker (OM) beacons,
112, 114. See also Beacons
Overdue aircraft, 460–461

P
Pacific flight rules, 478–480, 480
Pacific organized track system
(PACOTS), 478–480
PAPI (precision approach path
indicator), 135–136
PAR (precision approach radar),
342–344
Part-task training, 519
Passive control, 13
PATCO (Professional Air Traffic
Controllers Organization),
31–36
PBN (performance-based
navigation), 90
PBO (performance-based
organization), 514
PCA (positive controlled
airspace), 139
PCL (pilot-controlled lighting),
123–124
Performance-based navigation
(PBN), 90
Performance-based organization
(PBO), 514
Performance verification, 519
Phantom VORTAC, 77
Phraseology, standard
aircraft identification, 206–210
altitude assignments, 211–214
altitude report, 286
approach, 404–405, 406, 408
clearance, 205–206, 428–429
delay techniques, 444–445
departure, 210
en route separation, 440
handoff, 388–389
holding instructions, 215–217
numbers and letters, 195–197
overview, 195
radio frequencies, 201–202
report leaving, 288–289
route of flight, 211
standard abbreviations, 218–
219
taxi instructions, 431
transfer of radar identification,
387
vectors, 400–401
Pilotage, 46, 49

Pilot-controlled lighting (PCL),
123–124
Pilot reports (PIREPs), 249
Pilot’s discretion, 213–214
Plan position indicator (PPI),
325–328
Playbook routes, 424
Plotter, 49
Point in space metering, 500
Point out procedures, 389–390
Polar flights, 480–484
Positioning methods, aircraft, 67,
69–75
Positive controlled airspace
(PCA), 139
Positive separation, 167
PPI (plan position indicator),
325–328
Precision approach path indicator
(PAPI), 135–136
Precision approach radar (PAR),
342–344
Precision runway monitor (PRM),
350–351
Preferential routes, 234, 235–236
Presidential aircraft, 210
Pressure, atmospheric, 177
PRF (pulse repetition frequency),
323
stagger, 323
Primary radar identification,
382–383
Prime channel, 374
Prime meridian, 198
Private facilities, 228–229
Privatization, traffic control, 39
PRM (precision runway monitor),
350–351
Procedures, air traffic control
clearance delivery controller
duties, 250–251
flight data controller duties,
242–250
future changes, 491
ground controller duties,
252–255
handoff, 230, 233, 368, 387–
389, 438–442
helicopter operations,
271–272

Index
local controller duties, 256–271
merging-target procedures,
410–412
military use of civilian airspace,
224–225
overview, 224, 242
point out procedures, 389–390
wake turbulence, 272–278
Procedures for Air Navigation
Services (PANS), 464–465
Procedure turn, 95
Professional Air Traffic
Controllers Organization
(PATCO), 31–36
Prohibited airspace, 140, 184
Project Beacon, 28–30
Pronunciation. See Phraseology,
standard
Pseudo range, 85
Pulse radar, 320–329
Pulse repetition frequency (PRF),
323
Pulse repetition rate, 323
Pulse train, 354
R
Radar
aircraft identification, 382–386
airport surface detection
equipment (ASDE), 348–351
airport surveillance radar,
344–348
air traffic control radar beacon
system (ATCRBS), 351–359
arrivals and approaches,
401–408
basic radar separation, 390–
399
center radar ARTS presentation
(CENRAP), 379
computerized systems,
overview, 360–361
display controls, 339–341
Display System Replacement
(DSR), 375–376
enhanced backup and
surveillance (EBUS), 379
en route automation
modernization (ERAM),
377–379

ground clutter, 328
handoff procedures, 387–389
history of, 22–23, 319–320
loss of contact, 385–386
precision approach radar,
342–344
precision runway monitor
(PRM), 350–351
pulse radar, 320–329
radar-assisted navigation,
399–401
radar data processing (RDP),
373–375
receiver controls, 329–338
STARS, 372–373
traffic information, 408–412
transfer of identification,
386–390
transmitter controls, 338–339
transmitter frequency, 328
user request evaluation tool,
376–377, 412–415
Radar and beacon tracking level
(RBTL), 363
Radar approach control
(RAPCON), 222
Radar-approach control towers,
242
Radar associate/nonradar
controller, 237
Radar controllers, 237
Radar cross section, 327
Radar data acquisition and
transfer (RDAT), 374
Radar data acquisition system
(RDAS), 364
Radar data processing (RDP),
29–30, 361, 373–375
Radar mile, 325
Radar mosaic, 370, 393–394,
396–397
Radar scope, 325–328
Radar traffic advisories, 456
Radar Training Facility, 519
Radial, VOR, 62, 65
Radials, 68
Radial velocity, radar, 331
Radio communication
four-course radio range, 56–58
frequency assignments, 193–194

/

651

history of, 8–9, 12
overview, 191–195
radio operation, 194–195
Radio frequencies, phraseology,
201–202
Radio Technical Commission for
Aeronautics (RTCA), 19–20
RAILs (runway alignment
indicator lights), 130
RAIM (receiver autonomous
integrity monitoring), 86
Range cells, radar, 374
Range mark, 339
Range select switch, 339
Range time, 71
RAPCON (radar approach
control), 222
RBTL (radar and beacon tracking
level), 363
RCAG (remote communication
air/ground) devices, 280
RCC (Rescue Coordination
Center), 460–461
RCO (remote communications
outlet), 453
RDAS (radar data acquisition
system), 364
RDAT (radar data acquisition
and transfer), 374
RDP (radar data processing),
29–30, 361, 373–375
Receiver, radar, 325, 329–338
Receiver autonomous integrity
monitoring (RAIM), 86
Receiver gain, 329–330, 339–340
Receiving controller, 233
Reduced vertical separation
minima (RVSM), 391–392
Regional offices (RO), FAA, 512,
513–514
REILs (runway end identifier
lights), 131
Remote communication air/
ground (RCAG) devices, 280
Remote communications outlet
(RCO), 453
Remote digital display, 119
Reply signals, 352
Report crossing (RX), 307
Report leaving (RL), 214, 286

652 / Index
Report reaching (RR), 214, 286
Reports, required, 214
Required Navigation
Performance (RNP), 90–91,
494–495
Rescue Coordination Center
(RCC), 460–461
Restricted airspace, 140, 184–186
Reverse sensing, 109
Rho-rho position, 67, 69–75
Rho-theta position, 67, 69–75
Right traffic, 261
RL (report leaving), 214, 286
RNP (Required Navigation
Performance), 90–91, 494–
495
Rotating beacons, 53–54
Route description, 204, 211
Routes, preferential, 234
RR (report reaching), 214, 286
RTCA (Radio Technical
Commission for Aeronautics),
19–20
Runway alignment indicator
lights (RAILs), 130
Runway centerline lights, 125
Runway distance information,
266
Runway end identifier lights
(REILs), 131
Runway incursion, 252–255
Runway lighting, 123–136
Runway numbers, 201
Runways
runway use programs, 270–271
selection of, 270
Runway separation, 256–260
Runway visual range (RVR), 116,
119
RVR (runway visual range), 116,
119
RVSM (reduced vertical
separation minima), 391–392
RX (report crossing), 307
S
SAAAR procedures, 92
Safety alert, 458–459
SAGE (semiautomated ground
environment), 22–23

Salaries, 519–523
SAR (search and rescue), 460–
461
Satellite-Based Augmentation
System (SBAS), 87
SDF (simplified directional
facility), 119–120
Search and rescue (SAR), 460–
461
Secondary surveillance radar
(SSR), 351–359, 383–386
Sectional charts, 46–49
Security, navigation, 495–496
Security investigation, hiring,
517–518
Semiautomated ground
environment (SAGE), 22–23
Sensitivity time control (STC),
radar, 337–338
Separation
airspace dimensions, 283–285
arrivals and approach, 402
controlled airspace, 221–223
design of, 280–283
en route, 438–442
future trends, 504
holding patterns, 294–300
initial separation of aircraft,
308–315
lateral separation, 290–294,
395–397, 472, 477
longitudinal separation, 300–
308
MNPS airspace, 477–480
North Atlantic, 471–472
overview, 285
procedural standards, 487–488
radar, 390–399, 402
vertical separation, 285–290,
391–392, 471–472
visual separation, 315–317
Separation error, 285
September 11, 2001, 37–39, 227
Sequenced flashing lights (SFL),
128
Service volumes, 64
Severe weather avoidance plans
(SWAP), 424
SFL (sequenced flashing lights),
128

Short approach, 267
Shrimp boat, 12
Side lobe suppression (SLS), 353,
356–357
Signals, light guns, 7–8
Simplified directional facility
(SDF), 119–120
Simplified short approach lighting
system (SSALS), 130
SIP (special identification pulse),
354, 383–384
Skills building, training, 519
Slant range distance, 71–72
Slave station, 80
SLS (side lobe suppression), 353,
356–357
Small aircraft, 275
Spacing aircraft, 266–270
SPAN (stored program
alphanumeric), 373
Special aircraft and aircrew
authorization required
(SAAAR), 92
Special Committee 31 (SC-31),
19–20
Special identification pulse (SIP),
354, 383–384
Special use airspace, 139, 140,
184–186
Special VFR (SVFR) clearance,
173–174
Speed, 203
Squawking, 354–355
SR (strip request), 248
SSALS (simplified short approach
lighting system), 130
SSR (secondary surveillance
radar), 351–359, 383–386
Standard atmospheric pressure,
177
Standard terminal automation
replacement system (STARS),
37, 372–373, 393–394
STARS (standard terminal
automation replacement
system), 37, 372–373,
393–394
STC (sensitivity time control),
337–338
Stepping down, 289

Index
Stepping up, 289
Stop and go clearance, 269
Stored program alphanumeric
(SPAN), 373
Strip request (SR), 248
Surveillance systems, 496–497
SVFR (special VFR) clearance,
173–174
SWAP (severe weather avoidance
plans), 424
Sweep, radar, 325–326, 341
T
TAAS (Terminal Advanced
Automation System), 36
Tactical air navigation (TACAN),
20, 72–73, 202–203
Tangential tracks, 332–333
Tango routes, 182
Target, radar, 327
Target illumination, 324
Target resolution, 167
Taxi instructions, 271, 431
Taxiway edge lights, 125–126
Taxiways, 252–255
Taxiway turnoff lights, 125
TBO (trajectory-based
operations), 499
TCAS (traffic collision avoidance
system), 358–359
TCA (terminal control area), 165
Temporary flight restrictions
(TFRs), 185
Ten-channel selector, 355
Terminal Advanced Automation
System (TAAS), 36
Terminal Arrival area, 96–97
Terminal control area (TCA), 165
Terminal instrument approach
procedures (TERPS), 92–100
Terminal Radar Approach
Control (TRACON), 37, 222,
239, 523
Terminal VORs (TVORs), 64,
101–102
TERPS (terminal instrument
approach procedures),
92–100
TFRs (temporary flight
restrictions), 185

Threshold, radar, 330
Threshold lights, runway, 123
Time, radar, 337–338
Time, standard phraseology,
197–199
TIS (traffic information service),
359, 505
TMU (traffic management unit),
443
Touch and go clearance, 269
Touchdown zone lighting, 125
Tower visibility, 249
Tower without radar, 523
TPX-42, 361
Trackball, 365
Track drops, 368
Tracks, radar, 364
TRACON (terminal radar
approach control), 37, 222,
239, 523
Traffic advisories, 408–412
Traffic collision avoidance system
(TCAS), 358–359
Traffic flow management
programs, 420–423
Traffic information services
(TIS-B), 505
Traffic information service (TIS),
359
Traffic management unit (TMU),
443
Traffic pattern, 260
Traffic pattern legs, 260
Trajectory-based operations
(TBO), 499
Trajectory modeling, 377
Transfer of control, 230, 233,
368, 388–389, 438–442
Transfer of radar identification,
386–390
Transferring controller, 233
Transition level, 177
Transmissometer detector, 116,
119
Transmissometer projector, 116,
119
Transmitter, radar, 322–323, 328,
338–339
Trans-polar flights, 480–484
Transponder, 71, 352

/

653

Transport Canada, 466
Trial planning, 377
True airspeed, 296
True course, 49
True heading, 49
True north, 49
Turbulence, wake, 272–278,
394–396
Turn coordinator, 55
Turning errors, 52
U
UHF (ultra high frequency), 73
Unassociated tracks, 366
Uncontrolled airspace, 16, 139,
140, 183–184
Unions, 30–36
User request evaluation tool
(URET), 376–377, 412–415
UTC (coordinated universal time),
198
V
Variation chart, 51
VAR (visual aural range),
59–60
VASI (visual approach slope
indicator), 133–134
Vectoring for delay, 443–445
Vectors, 400–401, 402
Vertical guidance approaches,
121–122, 133–134
Vertical separation, 285–290,
391–392, 471–472
Very high frequency (VHF),
59–60, 194
VFR flight
controlled airspace, 153–155
example, 453–460
navigation, 53–54
uncontrolled airspace, 155
VFR on top, 212
VFR towers, 242
VHF omnidirectional range
(VOR), 20, 60–66
VHF (very high frequency), 59–60,
194
Victor airways, 176
Video map, 340–341
Visibility, 249

654 / Index
Visual approach, 92
Visual approach slope indicator
(VASI), 133–134
Visual aural range (VAR), 59–60
Visual flight rules, 4
Visual navigation, 46–49
Visual separation, 315–317
VORTAC, 73–75, 77–79
VOR (VHF omnidirectional
range), 20, 60–66
W
WAAS (wide area augmentation
system), 87

WACs (world aeronautical
charts), 49, 50
Wake turbulence, 272–278,
394–396
Warning areas, 186
Washington, D.C., 185–186, 227
Waveguide, 323
Waypoint, 77, 120–121,
181–182
Weather. See also User request
evaluation tool (URET)
relaying information, 248–250
severe weather avoidance plans
(SWAP), 424

VFR minima, uncontrolled
airspace, 155
VFR minima operations,
controlled airspace, 154
Wide area augmentation system
(WAAS), 87
Wind, 200–201. See also User
request evaluation tool
(URET)
Wind correction angle, 46
Workload permitting, 140
World aeronautical charts
(WACs), 49, 50
World War II, 17–18

