Prepared by:

Karmen Štumberger, MSc

Contents
1. Introduction
2. General
3. Departure phraseology
4. En‐route phraseology
5. Arrival phraseology
6. Emergency and urgency messages
7. Helicopter operations
8. Unattended aerodromes
9. Aerodromes with a flight information service officer
10. Gliding
11. Ballooning
12. Complete flights

1
2
12
16
20
23
25
26
27
29
31
32

Symbols used in the examples of use
Phraseology used by an airplane pilot
Phraseology used by a helicopter pilot
Phraseology used by a sailplane pilot
Phraseology used by a balloon pilot
Phraseology used by an air traffic controller
Phraseology used by an aeronautical station operator

Tables 2, 3, 4 and 5 are from Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2016/1185 of 20 July 2016
(Part C SERA). The photographs on pages i, 9 and 17 were made by photographer and pilot Miro
Majcen. The photographs on pages 13 and 15 were reproduced here with the permission of Primož
Jovanovič. The photograph on page 31 was taken by Rok Piciga. The photograph on page 26 was
contributed by Letalski klub Novo mesto, and photographs on pages 29 and 30 were reproduced
here by kind permission of Letalski center Maribor.

Acknowledgment
Special thanks go to Andrej Perc, Rastko Debevec and Vito Persoglia for their help with examples of
use and the director of CAA Rok Marolt for his support.

ii

A GUIDE TO VFR PHRASEOLOGY
FOR GENERAL AVIATION PILOTS IN SLOVENIA

Introduction
In spite of the common belief that the priorities for safe flying are ′aviate, navigate and then
communicate′, the correct use of standard phraseology (RTF) makes an important
contribution to the safe and efficient operation of aircraft. Standard phraseology should be
used for all situations for which it has been determined. Only when it cannot serve the
purpose of transmission, plain language should be used.
The purpose of this guide is to illustrate the use of standard ICAO phraseology in English for
VFR flights conducted in Slovenia and neighbouring states. The first chapter, explaining voice
communication procedures, is relevant also for pilots flying in accordance with instrument
flight rules.
The guide depicts the use of phraseology during arrival and departure, en route and for
training. It further describes the use of phraseology for helicopter operations, soaring,
ballooning and flying at uncontrolled aerodromes. It does not explain the use of all phrases
foreseen for VFR flights. Therefore, for the extensive list of phrases pilots should see Chapter
12 of the ICAO Document 4444, Air Traffic Management.
We tried to make the examples of use of RTF as realistic as possible. The examples, however,
should not be understood as prescribed communication in a given situation.
The use of generic pronoun he in this guide refers to both male and female.
This guide is based on the Guide to Phraseology for General Aviation Pilots in Europe,
published by European General Aviation Safety Team (EGAST) and Eurocontrol. Other
sources used in its preparation are the course book ′Letalska frazeologija, How do you read
(me)?′, written by Alenka Kukovec, M.Sc., Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No.
2016/1185 (Part C SERA) and ICAO Document 4444.

Maribor Tower S5‐DII,
how do you read?

S5‐DII Maribor
Tower, read you 5

1

General
◊ Aircraft call signs
The radiotelephony call sign of a general aviation aircraft is usually the aircraft registration,
e.g. S5‐DAS. The call sign of an aircraft used in commercial aviation is the telephony
designator of the aircraft operator, followed by the last four characters of the registration
marking of the aircraft, or by the flight identification, e.g. Easy 3246.
Aircraft call signs may be abbreviated. Abbreviated call signs contain the first character of
the registration and last two characters of the call sign, e.g. S‐AS, or the telephony
designator of the aircraft operator, followed by at least the last two characters of the call
sign, e.g. Adria AB. An aircraft shall not change the type of its radiotelephony call sign during
flight, except temporarily on the instruction of the controller.
◊ Ground station call signs
Ground stations are identified by the name of the location followed by a word (suffix)
denoting the type of unit or the service provided. This will normally be an air traffic control
or flight information service. Examples of ground station call signs are given in the table
below.
Table 1
Unit

Call sign Suffix

Instructions or information

Aerodrome control

GROUND
TOWER
APPROACH

Prevents collisions between
aircraft and on the
manoeuvring area between
aircraft and obstructions.

Radar Unit (ATC)

RADAR

Radar unit in general

Area Control Centre

CONTROL

Area control centre

Flight Information Service
(FIS)

INFORMATION

Provides information for safe
and efficient conduct of flights.

Aeronautical Station

RADIO

Aeronautical station in general

Once satisfactory communication has been established, the name of the location or the call
sing suffix may be omitted, e.g. ′Tower′ or ′Maribor′.

2

◊ Transmission of letters
When proper names, service abbreviations and other words are spelled out in
radiotelephony, the alphabet in Table 2 shall be used.
Table 2
Letter

Word

Approximate pronunciation (for Slovene
speakers of English)

A

Alfa

AL FA

B

Bravo

BRA VOU

C

Charlie

ČAR LI or ŠAR LI

D

Delta

DEL TA

E

Echo

EK OU

F

Foxtrot

FOKS TROT

G

Golf

GOLF

H

Hotel

HOU TEL

I

India

IN DI JA

J

Juliett

ĐU LI JET

K

Kilo

KI LOU

L

Lima

LI MA

M

Mike

MAJK

N

November

NO VEM BA

O

Oscar

OS KA

P

Papa

PA PA

Q

Quebec

KI BEK

R

Romeo

RO MI OU

S

Sierra

SI ER A

T

Tango

TEN GOU

U

Uniform

JU NI FORM or U NI FORM

V

Victor

VIK TOR

W

Whiskey

WIS KI

X

X‐ray

EKS REJ

Y

Yankee

JEN KI

Z

Zulu

ZU LU

With help of the alphabet from the above table, pilots transmit letters in the aircraft call
sign, names of reporting points, taxiway codes and certain parking position codes and ATIS
codes.

3

Examples
S5‐DAC

Sierra five Delta Alpha Charlie

DOL

(Delta Oscar Lima)

Taxiway T

(Taxiway Tango)

ATIS R

(Information Romeo)

◊ Transmission of numbers
Clear and comprehensive transmission of numbers is of vital importance in radiotelephony
communications. Therefore, to achieve the best readability on the frequency, a more
suitable form of pronunciation and transmission of numbers has been adopted.
All numbers used in the transmission of aircraft call signs, headings, runway, wind direction
and speed shall be transmitted by pronouncing each digit separately.
Flight levels shall be transmitted by pronouncing each digit separately, except for the case of
flight levels in whole hundreds.
The altimeter setting shall be transmitted by pronouncing each digit separately, except for
the case of a setting of 1 000 hPa, which shall be transmitted as ′ONE THOUSAND′.
All numbers used in the transmission of transponder codes shall be transmitted by
pronouncing each digit separately except, when the transponder codes contain whole
thousands only.
Examples

Transmitted as

Adria 14

Adria one four

RWY 30

runway three zero

Heading 101

heading one zero one

FL 100

flight level one hundred

QNH 1010

QNH one zero one zero

SQUAWK 6503

SQUAWK six five zero three

All numbers containing whole hundreds and whole thousands (e.g. used in the transmission
of altitude, cloud height, visibility and runway visual range) shall be transmitted by
pronouncing each digit in the number of hundreds or thousands followed by the word
′HUNDRED′ or ′THOUSAND′, as appropriate. Combinations of thousands and whole hundreds
shall be transmitted by pronouncing each digit in the number of thousands followed by the
word ′THOUSAND′, followed by the number of hundreds followed by the word ′HUNDRED′.

4

Examples

Transmitted as

altitude 2 300 feet

two thousand three hundred feet

cloud height 2 600 feet

two thousand six hundred feet

visibility 800 meters

eight hundred meters

When providing information regarding the relative bearing to an object or to conflicting
traffic in terms of the 12‐hour clock, the information shall be given pronouncing the digits
together such as ′TEN O'CLOCK′ or ′ELEVEN O'CLOCK′.
Numbers containing a decimal point shall be transmitted as prescribed in second paragraph
with the decimal point in appropriate sequence, indicated by the word ′DECIMAL′.
◊ Pronunciation of numbers
Numbers shall be transmitted using the pronunciation shown in Table 3.
Table 3
Numeral or numeral element

Pronunciation (for Slovene speakers of English)

0

ZI‐RO

1

WAN

2

TU

3

TRI

4

FO‐r

5

FAJF

6

SIKS

7

SEV‐n

8

EJT

9

NAJN‐r

10

TEN

11

I‐LE‐VN

12

TWELF

Decimal

DE‐SI‐MAL

Hundred

HAN‐drid

Thousand

TAU‐SND

5

◊ VHF frequencies
All six digits of the numerical designator shall be used to identify the transmitting channel in
very high frequency (VHF) radiotelephony communications, except when the fifth and sixth
digits are zeros, in which case only the first four digits shall be used.
Examples
118,0

one one eight decimal zero

128.880

one two eight decimal eight eight zero

128.175

one two eight decimal one seven five

◊ Transmission of time
Normally, only minutes are passed. If there is any possibility of confusion, the hour should be
included.
Examples
07 08

zero eight

or

zero seven zero eight

14 25

two five

or

one four two five

◊ Read back
Reading back a clearance and any safety critical information helps both the pilot and the
controller understand what the aircraft has been instructed to do. It also serves as a check
that the right aircraft, and only that aircraft, will take action on the clearance. It will be
easier for the pilot to read back the clearance if he notes it down.
◊ Items to be read back
Messages containing the following must be read back:









ATC route clearance
clearances/instructions to enter, land on, take‐off from, hold short of, cross or
backtrack any runway
runway in use
altimeter settings
SSR codes
level or heading instructions
speed instructions
transition levels

6

When a read back is required, the pilot must make sure it is complete and finish it with the
call sign. It is normally best to read back the items in the order given. If the departure
instructions are transmitted together with a take‐off clearance, it is more appropriate to
read back the take‐off clearance first, followed by the departure instructions.
◊ Use of ′wilco′
′WILCO′ means ′I understand your message and will comply with it′. This standard phrase
should not be used instead of a full read back of the items from the previous paragraph.
◊ Acknowledgement by call sign
If a transmission contains information that does not need to be read back, the pilot should
acknowledge it by transmitting his call sign or by transmitting his call sign preceded by the
word ′ROGER′.
◊ Transmitting technique
Transmissions shall be conducted concisely in a normal conversational tone.

◊ Standard words and phrases
The following words and phrases shall be used in radiotelephony communications as
appropriate, and shall have the meaning ascribed in Table 4.
Table 4
Phrase

Meaning

ACKNOWLEDGE

,Let me know that you have received and understood this
message.‘

AFFIRM

,Yes‘

APPROVED

,Permission for proposed action granted.‘

BREAK

,I hereby indicate the separation between portions of the
message.‘

BREAK BREAK

,I hereby indicate the separation between messages
transmitted to different aircraft in a very busy environment.‘

CANCEL

,Annul the previously transmitted clearance.‘

CHECK

,Examine a system or procedure.‘

CLEARED

,Authorised to proceed under the conditions specified.‘

CONFIRM

,I request verification of: (clearance, instruction, action,

7

information).‘
CONTACT

,Establish communications with ...‘

CORRECT

,True‘ or ,Accurate‘.

CORRECTION

,An error has been made in this transmission (or message
indicated). The correct version is ...‘

DISREGARD

,Ignore‘

HOW DO YOU READ

,What is the readability of my transmission?‘

I SAY AGAIN

,I repeat for clarity or emphasis.‘

MAINTAIN

,Continue in accordance with the condition(s) specified‘ or in its
literal sense.

MONITOR

,Listen out on (frequency).‘

NEGATIVE

,No‘ or ,Permission not granted‘ or ,That is not correct ‘ or ,Not
capable‘.

OVER

,My transmission is ended, and I expect a response from you.‘

OUT

,This exchange of transmissions is ended and no response is
expected.‘

READ BACK

,Repeat all, or the specified part, of this message back to me
exactly as received‘.

RECLEARED

,A change has been made to your last clearance and this new
clearance supersedes your previous clearance or part thereof.‘

REPORT

,Pass me the following information.‘

REQUEST

,I should like to know...‘ or ,I wish to obtain...‘

ROGER

,I have received all of your last transmission.‘

SAY AGAIN

,Repeat all, or the following part, of your last transmission.‘

SPEAK SLOWER

,Reduce your rate of speech.‘

STANDBY

,Wait and I will call you.‘

UNABLE

,I cannot comply with your request, instruction, or clearance.‘

WILCO

(Abbreviation for ,will comply‘)
,I understand your message and will comply with it.‘

WORDS TWICE

a) As a request: ,Communication is difficult. Please send every
word, or group of words, twice.‘
b) As information: ,Since communication is difficult, every word,
or group of words, in this message will be sent twice.‘

8

◊ Conditional Clearance
Conditional clearances, such as ′BEHIND LANDING AIRCRAFT′ or ′AFTER DEPARTING
AIRCRAFT′, shall not be used for movements affecting the active runway(s), except when the
aircraft or vehicles concerned are seen by the appropriate controller and pilot. The aircraft
or vehicle causing the condition in the clearance issued shall pass in front of the other
aircraft. A conditional clearance shall be given in the following order and consists of:





the call sign;
the condition;
the clearance; and
a brief repetition of the condition.

RTF Conditional Clearance
1.
S5‐DBS, report Seneca on final in sight
Seneca in sight, S5‐DBS
S5‐DBS, behind the landing Seneca, line up behind
behind the landing Seneca, line up behind, S5‐DBS

2.
S‐GI, report departing Cessna in sight
Cessna in sight, S‐GI
S‐GI, after departing Cessna has passed, runway 14, cleared to land, wind calm
after departing Cessna has passed, runway 14, cleared to land, S‐GI

9

◊ Categories of messages
The categories of messages handled by the aeronautical mobile service, and the order of
priority in the establishment of communications and the transmission of messages shall be
in accordance with the Table 5.
Table 5
Message category and radiotelephony order of priority
signal

Radiotelephony signal

1. Distress calls, distress messages and distress
traffic

MAYDAY

2. Urgency messages, including messages
preceded by the medical transport signal

PAN PAN or PAN PAN MEDICAL

3. Communications related to direction finding

–

4. Flight safety messages

–

5. Meteorological messages

–

6. Flight regularity messages

–

 Flight safety messages include movement and control messages, messages sent by an aircraft operator or by
an aircraft and meteorological advice of immediate concern to an aircraft.

◊ Test transmissions
The test transmission shall follow the format shown in the example on page 12. It includes
identification of the station being called, identification of the station calling, the words
′RADIO CHECK′ and the frequency being used. The readability of the station making the test
transmission is assessed in accordance with the following scale:
1. Unreadable
2. Readable now and then
3. Readable but with difficulty
4. Readable
5. Perfectly readable
◊ Clarification of instructions and corrections
If the pilot does not fully understand the instructions given, or they are inconsistent with his
request, the pilot asks the controller to repeat the message using the phrase ′SAY AGAIN′.
When an error has been made in transmission, the word ′CORRECTION′ shall be spoken, the
last correct group or phrase repeated, and then the correct version transmitted.

10

◊ Use of blind transmission
When an aircraft fails to establish contact on the designated channel(s), and fails to establish
communication with the ATS unit(s), or other aircraft, the aircraft shall transmit its message
twice preceded by the phrase ΄TRANSMITTING BLIND΄. When an aircraft is unable to
establish communication due to receiver failure, it shall transmit reports at the scheduled
times, or positions, on the channel in use preceded by the phrase ΄TRANSMITTING BLIND
DUE TO RECEIVER FAILURE΄.
◊ Establishing and continuing communication
Full radiotelephony call signs shall always be used when establishing communication.
Aircraft shall start their call by the designation of the station called, followed by the
designation of the station calling.
The reply to the above calls shall use the call sign of the station calling, followed by the call
sign of the station answering, which shall be considered an invitation to proceed with
transmission.
Communications shall begin with a call and a reply when it is desired to establish contact,
except that, when it is certain that the station called will receive the call, the calling station
may transmit the message, without waiting for a reply from the station called.
Once satisfactory communication has been established, the abbreviated call signs shall be
used. The pilot shall use the shortened call sign when addressed in this manner by the
controller.
◊ Placing of call signs
Once satisfactory communication has been established, the message is normally prefixed
with the aircraft call sign. However, when the pilot needs to read back an instruction or
important information, he places the call sign at the end of the message.
◊ Reporting
Aircraft equipped with suitable two‐way radio‐communications shall report during the
period 20 to 40 minutes to indicate that the flight is progressing according to plan. Such
report to comprise identification of the aircraft and the words ΄OPERATIONS NORMAL΄.

11

Departure Phraseology
◊ Departure from an aerodrome with ATC
This section provides examples of the RTF typically used by a pilot departing from a
controlled aerodrome. Pilots need to be familiar with the type of air traffic control service
provided at each aerodrome and working hours of the ATC service.
RTF Engine start‐up and radio check
Portorož Tower S5‐DAA, radio check 115,15
S5‐DAA Portorož Tower, read you 5
S5‐DAA, request departure information
S‐AA, runway 33, wind 090 degrees 6 knots, QNH 1014, temperature 5, dew point 3, clouds scattered
at 2000 feet
runway 33, QNH 1014, S‐AA

◊ Automatic Terminal Information Service (ATIS)
At aerodromes where departure information is broadcast on an ATIS, the request for
departure information is omitted. The pilot acknowledges receipt of the ATIS information by
including the ATIS identifying letter in the request for taxi.
◊ Taxi instructions
All taxi instructions contain a limit which represents the point at which the pilot must stop
unless a permission to proceed is given. Taxi instructions are not a permission to enter a
runway or a clearance for take‐off. Sometimes the controller may use the additional phrase
′HOLD SHORT (OF)′ to stress the limit. Taxi instructions may be complicated. Writing them
down whenever possible helps to prevent runway incursions.
RTF Taxiing
1.
Maribor Approach S5‐DBS, main apron, information R, request taxi for VFR flight to Lesce
S‐BS Maribor Approach, taxi to holding point A, runway 14, QNH 1002, report ready for departure
taxiing to holding point A, runway 14, QNH 1002, wilco, S‐BS

2.
Ljubljana Tower S5‐DAT, position G, information C, request detailed taxi instructions
S‐AT Ljubljana Tower, taxi to holding point runway 30 via T, A and K, QNH 1003, report ready for
departure
taxiing to holding point runway 30 via T, A and K, QNH 1003, wilco, S‐AT

12

Important phrases (taxiing)
start up at (time)
taxi to holding point runway (number)
taxi via (taxiways)
cross runway
hold short of runway (number)
expedite taxi
line up
hold position

request start up
request taxi
request detailed taxi instructions
request cross runway
runway vacated
expediting taxi
lining up
holding position

◊ Clearance for take‐off
In relation to runway movements, the word ′CLEARED′ is only used in connection with a
clearance to take‐off or land. For other RTF exchanges, words such as ′cross′, ′departure′ and
′approved′ should be used. In addition, the word take‐off shall be used in the take‐off
clearance or its cancellation. At other times, pilot should use the terms ′departure′ and
′airborne′. If there is conflicting traffic, the controller may instruct the pilot to ′HOLD
POSITION′. This instruction needs to be acknowledged by the pilot with the phrase
′HOLDING′.
RTF Take‐off
1.

Maribor
S‐BS, ready for departure
S‐BS, line up and wait
lining up and waiting, S‐BS
S‐BS, runway 14 cleared for take‐off, wind 120 degrees 6 knots, after departure turn right to MS1,
climb to 3500 feet, report MS1
runway 14 cleared for take‐off, wind 120 degrees 6 knots, after departure turn right to MS1, climb
to 3500 feet, wilco, S‐BS

13

2.

Ljubljana
S‐AT, ready for departure
S‐AT, line up runway 12, cleared for take‐off, wind 090 degrees 6 knots, after departure turn right
to S3, climb to 2500 feet
line up runway 12, cleared for take‐off, turn right to S3, climb to 2500 feet, S‐AT
S‐AT, hold position, I say again, hold position, obstacle on runway 12
holding position, S‐AT

3.

Portorož
S‐EW, ready for departure
S‐EW line up runway 33, cleared for take‐off, after departure turn right to PE2, climb to 3000 feet,
report PE1
line up runway 33, cleared for take‐off, after departure turn right to PE2, climb to 3000 feet, wilco,
S‐EW

Important phrases (take‐off)
report when ready [for departure]?
Are you ready [for departure]
line up runway (number)
line up [and wait)
runway (number) cleared for take‐off
[after departure] turn right (or left or
climb)
report airborne
continue runway heading

ready for departure
ready
lining up runway (number)
lining up and waiting
runway (number) cleared for take‐off
re quest right (or left) turn
airborne

14

◊ Changing frequency
Pilots will normally be advised by a ground station to change from one radio frequency to
another. In absence of such advice, the pilot has to notify the ground station before
changing frequency, using the phrase ′REQUEST CHANGE TO (ATS unit)′. In controlled
airspace, the pilot must get permission from the ATC before changing frequency.
RTF Departure
S‐AT, airborne at 08, report S3 at 2500 feet
wilco, climbing to 2500 feet, S‐AT
S‐AT, passing S3 at 43
S‐AT, contact Ljubljana Information 118,475
118,475, S‐AT
Ljubljana Information S5‐DAT, passing S3 at 43, to Novo mesto
S‐AT, QNH 1012, continue visually to Novo mesto, report before changing to local frequency
QNH 1012, continuing visually to Novo mesto, wilco, S‐AT

Important phrases (departure, frequency change)
frequency change approved
contact (unit call sign, frequency)
stand‐by for (unit call sign, frequency)
monitor (station, frequency)
when ready contact
remain this frequency

request change to (frequency)
monitoring (frequency)

15

En‐route Phraseology
◊ Initial call
When establishing contact, the initial call consists of the call sign of the unit the pilot is
calling followed by his own call sign. The ground unit will reply with the call sign of the plane
followed by their own. Then the pilot informs the ground station of his position, intentions
and service required. Reports should be transmitted in the standard order:






Aircraft call sign (and type if necessary)
Position (and time over)
Flight level or altitude
Next position and time over and following significant point
Additional information (e.g.: purpose at the aerodrome)

The pilot shall report position over important reporting points. Position reporting may be
omitted if flight progress data is available from other sources such as radar, or if requested
by the controller (e.g.: ′OMIT POSITION REPORTING′).
RTF Position Reporting
Ljubljana Information S5‐DEW
S5‐DEW Ljubljana Information
S5‐DEW overhead Velike Lašče at 24, passing 4500 feet, climbing to 6500 feet, estimating ILB at 40,
PE1 next
S‐EW report three minutes before PE1
wilco, S‐EW

◊ Identification by transponder
Use of the transponder helps the controller and pilots of other aircraft fitted with airborne
collision avoidance system (ACAS). If an aircraft carries a serviceable transponder, the pilot
shall operate it at all times during flight. The pilot shall select codes as instructed by the
controller. In absence of such instructions, the pilot selects the code 2000.
To indicate the state of emergency, the pilot selects Code 7700. Code 7600 is selected to
indicate a state of radio‐communication failure and Code 7500 is reserved for unlawful
interference.

SQUA
SQUA

WK
WK

Squawks, or squawking has its origins in The Second World War, when the
Identification Friend or Foe systems were first installed. This IFF system was
codenamed parrot during the war and hence the modern term “squawk.”

16

RTF Squawk
S‐AA, advise transponder capability
transponder Charlie, S‐AA
S‐AA, squawk 6503
squawk 6503, S‐AA

Important phrases (transponder)
advise transponder capability
reset squawk (code)
for departure squawk (code)
confirm squawk (code)
squawk ident / MAYDAY

transponder (as in the flight plan)
resetting (mode, code)
squawk (code)
squawking (code)
negative transponder

◊ Traffic information and avoiding action
VFR flights should maintain their own separation. They are assisted by ATC who provide
information on other traffic in their vicinity and avoiding action. Information on other traffic
is given in the form of a relative bearing of the conflicting traffic in terms of 12‐hour clock,
distance from the conflicting traffic and its direction followed by other related information.
The pilot acknowledges the traffic information with the phrase ′LOOKING OUT′. When the
pilot locates the other traffic, he advises the controller using the phrase ′TRAFFIC IN SIGHT′.
If he cannot locate the other traffic, he uses the phrase ′NEGATIVE CONTACT′.
RTF Traffic information
S‐AB, light aircraft 11 o'clock, crossing left to right at 4500 feet
looking out, S‐AB
S‐AA, light aircraft 2 o'clock, crossing right to left at 4000 feet
S‐AA, traffic in sight

Aviation humour:

′Traffic is a light aircraft, 9 o'clock, range 4 meters, same direction, same altitude ′

17

Important phrases (traffic information)
traffic (number) o’clock (distance,
direction) fast moving, closing, opposite
direction, crossing left to right
Do you want vectors?
clear of traffic

traffic in sight
looking out
negative contact
request vectors

◊ Flight plans
When the pilot files the flight plan during flight, he should contact flight information service
and transmit data in the flight plan format.
Ljubljana Information S5‐DAA, request file flight plan
S5‐DAA Ljubljana Information, ready to copy

When the pilot is landing at an aerodrome which is not his planned destination, he must
close the flight plan to avoid unnecessary search and rescue activity. The pilot may do this by
radio before landing or by telephone after landing.
RTF Closing a flight plan
Ljubljana Information S5‐DJJ, airport Lesce in sight, changing to local frequency, request close flight
plan
S5‐DJJ Ljubljana Information, flight plan closed at 40

If the weather permits, the pilot may change an IFR flight to VFR flight.
RTF Changing from IFR to VFR
Ljubljana Radar S5‐DAA, cancelling my IFR flight, continuing VFR to S1
S5‐DAA Ljubljana Radar, IFR flight cancelled at 25, continue to S1, contact Ljubljana Information
118,475

◊ Weather information
The pilot may obtain weather information in the form of reports, forecasts and warnings on
ATIS or VOLMET frequency, from a tower controller or flight information services operator.
RTF Requesting weather data
Maribor Tower S5‐DBS, request present weather
S5‐DBS Maribor Tower, wind 120 degrees 5 knots, clouds scattered 2000 feet, temperature 5, dew
point 3, QNH 1023
QNH 1023, S5‐DBS

18

◊ Runway condition
Runway condition can be included in departure or arrival information, it can, however, be
also transmitted to the pilot at the appropriate time.
RTF Runway condition
S5‐DSC, runway 30 cleared to land, just landed Cessna reported braking action poor
runway 30 cleared to land, roger, S5‐DSC

Important phrases (weather information and runway condition)
temperature ‐2, dew point 0
wind gusting at (number of knots)
moderate turbulence

runway (number) condition (condition)
landing surface (condition)
caution construction works/obstacle
runway wet/covered with snow
breaking action good/medium/poor

◊ Weather avoidance
Weather does not always do what the forecasts predict and it can deteriorate very fast. When the
pilot is receiving ATC service, he should advise the controller of the situation and request an
alternative level or route.
RTF Unable to maintain VMC
S5‐DAA, unable to maintain VMC due clouds, request turn left to Ptuj

◊ Crossing controlled airspace
If the pilot intends to fly through controlled airspace, he needs to obtain clearance to enter it and has
to follow ATC instructions. The request needs to be made in good time (at least 5 minutes before),
and should include the position and time of entering the controlled airspace.
RTF Crossing of controlled airspace
Maribor Approach S5‐DAS
S5‐DAS Maribor Approach
S5‐DAS, VFR from Murska Sobota to Celje, 15 miles north of Maribor, climbing to 2500 feet, request
climb to 4000 feet and cross controlled airspace from ME1 to MS3
S‐AS, maintain 2500 feet, report over ME1
S‐AS, over ME1, 2500 feet
S‐AS, report over MS3, climb to 4000 feet
climbing to 4000 feet, wilco, S‐AS
S‐AS, over MS3, 4000 feet
S‐AS, contact Ljubljana Information 118,475

19

Arrival Phraseology
◊ First call
The pilot should make the initial call in sufficient time to allow a planned entry into the
circuit, Aerodrome Traffic Zone or controlled airspace. If the aerodrome provides ATIS, the
pilot acknowledges the receipt by including the ATIS code in the initial call. The controller
gives the pilot appropriate instructions.
RTF Entering the controlled airspace
Ljubljana Information S5‐DBS
S5‐DBS Ljubljana Information
S5‐DBS, VFR from Maribor to Ljubljana, altitude 4000 feet, estimating NE at 24
S‐BS, report 3 minutes before NE, QNH 1012
QNH 1012, wilco, S‐BS
S‐BS, 3 minutes before NE
S‐BS, contact Ljubljana tower 118.0
118.0, S‐BS

◊ Straight‐in‐approach
Depending on prevailing traffic condition and the direction from which an aircraft is arriving,
the controller may give the pilot a straight‐in‐approach.
RTF Straight‐in‐approach and landing
Ljubljana Tower S5‐DJP, passing W1 at 4000 feet, for landing
S5‐DJP Ljubljana Tower, cleared straight‐in‐approach runway 12, wind 140 degrees 8 knots, QNH
1013, report final
cleared straight‐in‐approach runway 12, QNH 1013, will report final, S5‐DJP
S5‐DJP, final runway 12
S‐JP, runway 12 cleared to land, wind 140 degrees 8 knots
runway 12 cleared to land, S‐JP

Important phrases (approach and landing)

report runway (lights, field) in sight
hold visual over / between ….. and…..
orbit right/left
(due traffic, spacing, delay)
cleared (type of approach) runway
(number)
cleared to land

request landing instructions
runway in sight
request straight‐in‐approach

20

◊ Traffic circuit and landing
The pilot should make the request for instructions to join the traffic circuit in good time.
Having joined the traffic circuit, the pilot makes routine reports. The compulsory reports are
downwind and final, other reports are made on request. The examples in this section refer
to the left‐hand pattern. When the traffic circuit is in a right traffic pattern, IT should be
specified, e.g. ΄REPORT RIGHT DOWNWIND΄. Left‐hand patters don't have to be specified.

Picture : Left‐hand pattern
RTF Joining the circuit and landing
Portorož Approach S5‐DMN, over PE1, 3000 feet, for landing
S5‐DMN Portorož Approach, QNH 1021, runway in use 33, continue to the airport, descend visually
to 1000 feet, report runway in sight
QNH 1021, runway in use 33, continuing to the airport, descending visually to 1000 feet, wilco, S5‐
DMN
S5‐DMN, runway in sight
S‐MN, number 2, traffic is Piper Tomahawk on final, runway 33, report base
traffic in sight, will report base, S‐MN
S‐MN, base
S‐MN, runway 33, cleared to land, wind 300 degrees, 8 knots gusting at 12
runway 33, cleared to land, S‐MN

Important phrases (joining the circuit and landing)
join [direction of circuit] (position in
circuit) (runway)
report downwind/base/final
extend downwind
make short/long approach
number… follow (A/C type and position)
runway (number) cleared to land
vacate (via) / report (runway) vacated

(position)(level) for landing
downwind/final

21

RTF Landing and vacating runway
S‐MN, vacate right, report runway vacated, continue to general aviation apron via taxiways A and T
vacating right, continuing to general aviation apron via taxiways A and T, wilco, S‐MN
S‐MN, runway vacated

◊ Missed approach

To avert an unsafe situation, the controller may instruct the pilot to perform a missed
approach. The pilot reads back the instruction and continues into the traffic circuit if no
other instruction is given. The manoeuver may be initiated by the pilot who informs the
controller about it using the phrase ′GOING AROUND΄.
RTF Missed approach
S‐JP, go around, vehicle on the runway
going around, S‐JP

◊ Training

For training purposes, the pilot might request an approach along or parallel to the runway,
without stopping.
If the pilot wishes to land and take‐off again, he may ask for a touch‐and‐go. However, if the
pilot wants to perform a normal landing and then take‐off again, he requests a stop‐and‐go.
When he finishes the training, he requests a full‐stop.
RTF Touch‐and‐go
S‐AT, downwind, request touch‐and‐go
S‐AT, expect touch‐and‐go, report final runway 14
will report final, S‐AT
S‐AT, final runway 14
S‐AT, runway 14, cleared touch‐and‐go, wind 120 degrees 5 knots
runway 14 cleared touch‐and‐go, S‐AT

Important phrases (training)
cleared low approach runway (number)
expect touch‐and‐go
make full stop
cleared low pass

request low approach (reasons)
request touch‐and‐go
request stop‐and‐go
request low pass
request full stop

22

Distress message
The word ′MAYDAY′ announces a distress message that should be sent by an aircraft
experiencing a condition of being threatened by serious and/or imminent danger and of
requiring immediate assistance. A distress message should normally be made on the
frequency used at the time. The pilot may change to the emergency frequency 121.500 MHz
or another frequency if better assistance can be provided on these frequencies.
Distress messages shall consist of as many as possible of the following elements spoken
distinctly and, if possible, in the following order:
Content
distress signal

Example
MAYDAY MAYDAY MAYDAY

the name of the station addressed

Maribor Approach

the identification of the aircraft

S5‐DAT

the nature of the distress condition

engine shutdown

the intention of the pilot‐in‐command

landing at airfield Cerkvenjak

position, level and heading

overhead Lenart, 4500 feet

The ATS unit addressed by an aircraft in distress acknowledges the receipt of the distress
message with the phrase ′ROGER MAYDAY′. The unit takes control of the communication or
clearly transfers that responsibility.
The ATS unit in control of distress traffic may imposes radio silence, either on all stations in
the area or on any station which interferes with the distress traffic, using the phrase ′STOP
TRANSMITTING, MAYDAY′.
All stations/S5‐DBS Ljubljana Approach, stop transmitting, MAYDAY

When an aircraft is no longer in distress, it shall transmit a message cancelling the distress
condition.
S5‐DAT Maribor Tower, cancel distress, fire extinguished

The controller terminates the distress communication and silence conditions by
transmitting a message, including the words ′DISTRESS TRAFFIC ENDED΄.

23

Distress situations
engine shutdown / on fire / losing
power
short of fuel / fuel
severe icing problem

lost [in cloud, fog]
technical trouble
electrical failure
smoke in the cockpit

Urgency message
An aircraft sends out the urgency message if she wishes to give notice of a condition,
concerning the safety of an aircraft or other vehicle, or of some person on board or within
sight, but which does not require immediate assistance. The pilot starts the message with
the word ′PAN PAN′, preferably spoken three times. The urgency message shall be made on
the frequency in use at the time and shall contain the following elements:
Content
urgency signal

Example
PAN PAN PAN PAN PAN PAN

the name of the station addressed

Portorož Approach

the identification of the aircraft

S5‐PEA

the nature of the urgency condition

passenger with health problems

the intention of the pilot‐in‐command

request immediate landing

position, level and heading

overhead Piran, at 2000 feet

The ATS unit addressed by an aircraft acknowledges the receipt of the urgency message
and, if necessary, exercises control of communications.
Urgency situations
bird strike
minor technical failure

pilot’s health trouble
passenger's health trouble

A hawk with a mouse caught by a web camera at Aerodrome Ljubljana

24

Helicopter Operations
Based on an appropriate permission, helicopters may be able to land and take‐off from areas
of the aerodrome other than the runway. Therefore, helicopter pilots need to inform the
controller which area of the aerodrome they intend to use. When the take‐off is made from
the runway, the phraseology in the example below should be used.
RTF Air taxiing
Ljubljana Tower S5‐HNM, on military apron, Information C, request air‐taxiing
S‐NM Ljubljana Tower, air‐taxi to holding point runway 30 via F, QNH 1003, report ready for
departure
air‐taxi to holding point runway 30 via F, QNH 1003, wilco, S‐NM

When the pilot takes off from another point on the manoeuvring area, the area needs to be
specified in the transmission, e.g. ′(area), READY FOR DEPARTURE′.
RTF Departure
Ljubljana Tower S5‐HNM, request departure instructions from present position to Kredarica
S‐NM Ljubljana Tower, cleared for take‐off, after departure turn right, direction 30, climb to 6000
feet
cleared for take‐off, after departure turn right, direction 30, climb to 6000 feet, S‐NM

Important phrases (departure)
air‐taxi to holding point runway
(number) via (route)
air‐taxi to (location)
air‐taxi via (route) to (location)
caution dust, blowing snow, debris

request air‐taxiing from … to
request departure instructions from (take
off area) to

25

Unattended Aerodromes
◊ Operations outside the hours of ATS
At some aerodromes operations may take place outside working hours of an air traffic
services unit. To improve safety at such aerodromes, the pilot should broadcast information
on his position and intentions to other aircraft that may be operating on or in the vicinity of
the aerodrome. Besides position and intentions, his transmissions shall include the name of
the aerodrome and the runway he intends to use.
RTF Taxiing and departure
Aerodrome Novo mesto, S5‐DBK, taxiing to runway 23
Aerodrome Novo mesto, S5‐DBK, lining up runway 23 for departure
Aerodrome Novo mesto, S5‐DBK, airborne, departing north

◊ Arrival Transmissions
The initial call should be made 5 minutes before arriving at the aerodrome. The examples
below show arrival transmissions relating to a normal traffic pattern. Pilots may adapt calls
as necessary depending on the situation and any other traffic in the vicinity.
RTF Arrival
Aerodrome Novo mesto, S5‐DBK, at 2000 feet, joining right‐hand circuit runway 23
Aerodrome Novo mesto, S5‐DBK, right downwind, runway 23
Aerodrome Novo mesto, S5‐DBK, final runway 23

26

Aerodromes with a flight information service officer
This section provides examples of the RTF used by a pilot at an aerodrome with a flight
information service officer on duty. The AFIS officer provides information necessary for the
safe and efficient operation of aerodrome traffic.
◊ Taxiing and departure
The mobile station operator provides information regarding taxiing and occupation of the
runway.
RTF Taxiing and take‐off
Aerodrome Lesce S5‐DJJ, good day
S‐JJ, Aerodrome Lesce, good day
S‐JJ, request taxi for work in zone Vrba
S‐JJ, taxi to runway 14, wind 160 degrees 2 knots, report ready for departure
taxiing to runway 14, wilco, S‐JJ
S‐JJ, holding point runway 14, ready for departure
S‐JJ, runway 14 free for departure, wind 100 degrees 3 knots, report overhead Vrba
runway 14 free for departure, wilco, S‐JJ

◊ Training
For training purposes, the pilot may ask for permission to fly in the traffic circuit or to
perform an approach along or parallel to the runway. He can further ask for a touch‐and‐go,
stop‐and‐go, flying in the zone or engine failure imitation.
RTF Training (traffic circuit)
S5‐DJJ, ready for departure, traffic patterns
S‐JJ, runway free for departure, left‐hand pattern, report downwind
left‐hand pattern, will report downwind, S‐JJ
S‐JJ, downwind, runway 14
S‐JJ, report final
will report final, S‐JJ
S‐JJ, final runway 14, for touch‐and‐go
S‐JJ, runway 14 free for touch‐and‐go, wind 130 degrees 2 knots
runway 14 free for touch‐and‐go, S‐JJ

27

RTF Training (engine failure imitation)
Lesce S‐JJ, left‐hand traffic circuit, for engine failure imitation
S‐JJ, engine failure imitation approved, report one minute before imitation
engine failure imitation approved, wilco, S‐JJ
Lesce S‐JJ, one minute before start of imitation
S‐JJ, runway 14, land at own discretion, wind 130 degrees 2 knots
runway 14, land at own discretion, S‐JJ

◊ Approach
The aeronautical station operator provides information for joining the traffic circuit and
landing. He does not give instructions and clearances.
RTF Joining the circuit and landing
Aerodrome Lesce S5‐DJJ, good morning
S‐JJ Aerodrome Lesce, good morning
S‐JJ, over W2, altitude 3000 feet, for landing
S‐JJ, join left‐hand circuit, runway 14, report downwind
join left‐hand circuit, runway 14, will report downwind, S‐JJ
S‐JJ, downwind
S‐JJ, report final runway 14
will report final, S‐JJ
S5‐DJJ, final runway 14
S‐JJ, runway 14 free for landing, wind 100 degrees 2 knots
runway 14 free for landing, S‐JJ

28

Gliding

◊ Departure
RTF Take‐off and rope dropping
Bovec Blanik 10, radio check 123.500
Blanik 10, read you 4
Blanik 10, ready for departure
Blanik 10, roger
S‐AR, runway free for departure
runway free for departure, S‐AR

Bovec Blanik 10, disconnected
Blanik 10, roger

S‐AR, for dropping (rope)
S‐AR, continue runway 07, for dropping
S‐AR, rope dropped (retracted)
S‐AR, (rope dropped) report final runway 25
S‐AR, final runway 25
S‐AR, runway 25, land at own discretion, wind 120 degrees 5 knots
runway 25, land at own discretion, S‐AR

◊ Sailing
RTF Sailing
Cirus 16 Podpeč, report position
Cirus 16, over Krvavec, 4000 meters, climbing 3 meters per second
Cirus 16

29

◊ Approach
RTF Approach
Podpeč Blanik 10, overhead Grintavec, at 2000 m, on course to Podpeč
Blanik 10, contact Ljubljana Approach 118.750 for crossing TMA Ljubljana
118.750, Blanik 10

Ljubljana Approach Blanik 10, over Krvavec, at 1800 meters, request crossing TMA Ljubljana
Blanik 10, continue direct to S3, call over airport Ljubljana
continuing direct to S3, wilco, Blanik 10
Blanik 10, over airport Ljubljana, at 1700 meters, on course to S3
Blanik 10, report passing S3, caution light aircraft approaching head on
wilco, light aircraft in sight, Blanik 10
Blanik 10 over S3, at 1500 meters
Blanik 10, contact Podpeč 123.500
123.500, Blanik 10

Podpeč Blanik 10, zone Podpeč, gear down and locked
Blanik 10 Podpeč, runway 26 free for landing, land on T
runway 26 free for landing, wilco, Blanik 10

30

Ballooning

The balloon pilot makes contact with air traffic control after take‐off. He reports his position,
height and flight direction. If the altitude changes during the flight, the change is reported to
the controller. The controller states the conditions under which the pilot may continue his
flight, and instructs the pilot to report when he will start the landing manoeuvre.
RTF Airborne
Ljubljana Information S5‐ORP, airborne at Barje at 15, intended altitude 2000 feet, direction Ig
S5‐ORP Ljubljana Information, roger, QNH 1002, Squawk 7001, report before landing
QNH 1002, Squawk 7001, wilco, S5‐ORP

RTF Position reporting
S5‐ORP Ljubljana Information, report position
Ljubljana Information S5‐ORP, over Matena, altitude 2000 feet, direction east

RTF Change of altitude
Ljubljana Information S5‐ORP, request level change
S‐RP Ljubljana Information, climb to 4000 feet approved
climb to 4000 feet approved, S‐RP

RTF Landing
Ljubljana Information S5‐ORP, starting landing procedure
S‐RP Ljubljana Information, roger, report after landing. Do you request close flight plan?
wilco, request close flight plan, S‐RP

or
wilco, will inform you after landing over the phone, S‐RP

31

Complete flights
1.

RTF A cross‐country flight to Ronchi departing from Portorož
S‐BS, runway 15 cleared for take‐off, wind 120 degrees 6 knots, after departure turn left, climb to
2000 feet, report PN1
runway 15 cleared for take‐off, after departure turn left, climb to 2000 feet, wilco, S‐BS
S‐BS, over PN1, 2000 feet
S‐BS, continue direct to VICKY, climb to 2500 feet
continue direct to VICKY, climbing to 2500 feet, S‐BS
S‐BS, overhead VICKY, 2500 feet
S‐BS, contact Ronchi Approach 119,15
119,15, S‐BS
Ronchi Approach, S5‐BS, passing VICKY, at 2500 feet, proceeding to GRADO, Ronchi next, for touch‐
and‐go
S‐BS, sr, sh…, fdvn
Ronchi Approach, S5‐BS, say again, unreadable
S5‐BS, Ronchi Approach, proceed to GRADO, maintain 2500 feet, QNH 1013, report GRADO
proceed to GRADO, maintain 2500 feet, QNH 1013, wilco, S‐BS
S‐BS, overhead GRADO
S‐BS, contact Ronchi Tower 130,2
130,2, S‐BS
Ronchi Tower, S5‐DBS, passing GRADO, for touch‐and‐go
S‐BS Ronchi Tower, join left base runway 09, report final
joining left base runway 09, will report final, S‐BS
S‐BS, final
S‐BS, runway 09, cleared touch‐and‐go, wind 070 degrees 8 knots, after touch‐and‐go proceed to
RIFEN, climb to 2500 feet, report RIFEN
runway 09, cleared touch‐and‐go, after touch‐and‐go proceed to RIFEN, climb to 2500 feet, willco, S‐
BS
Ronchi Tower, S5‐DBS, passing RIFEN at 2500 feet
S‐BS, Contact Ljubljana Information 118,475

32

2.

RTF A cross‐country flight to Venice departing from Ljubljana
Ljubljana Tower S5‐DAA, dober dan.
S5‐DAA Ljubljana Tower, dober dan, go ahead
position G9, request taxi for a VFR flight, via S3, S5‐DAA.
S‐AA, stand‐by, traffic entering GA apron.
S‐AA

…
9A‐DVW, expedite via RWY A to GA apron.
expediting, 9A‐DVW.

…
S‐AA, taxi to holding point F, via TWY T and A, QNH 999.
taxiing to holding point F, via TWY T and A, QNH 999, S‐AA.

…
S‐AA, ready for departure.
S‐AA, RWY 12, cleared for take‐off, wind 140 degrees, 8 knots, after departure turn right to S3, climb
to 2500 feet, squawk 3363
RWY 12, cleared for take‐off, after departure turn right to S3, climb to 2500 feet, squawk 3663, S‐AA
S‐AA, negative, squawk 3363.
squawk 3363, S‐AA

…
S‐AA, over S3, 2500 feet
S‐AA, contact Ljubljana Information, 118,475
118,475, S‐AA
Ljubljana Information, S5‐DAA, dober dan
S‐AA Ljubljana Information, dober dan
over S3, estimating S1 at 53’, RIFEN next, request 6500 feet
S‐AA, maintain 1000 feet AGL, report abeam Logatec
maintaining 1000 feet AGL, wilco, S‐AA

…
S‐AA, abeam Logatec
S‐AA, 6500 feet approved, report estimated time over RIFEN
climbing to 6500 feet, estimating RIFEN at 15 next hour, S‐AA
S‐AA, roger

…
S‐AA Padova, request, 3000 feet over RIFEN, report 2 minutes before
descending to cross RIFEN at 3000 feet, wilco, S‐AA.

…
S‐AA, 2 minutes to RIFEN
S‐AA, contact Padova Information, 124,150

33

124,150, S‐AA.
Padova Information S5‐DAA, good day.
S‐AA Padova Information, good day, QNH 1000, report Grado.
QNH 1000, wilco, S‐AA.

…
S‐AA, overhead Grado.
S‐AA, descend to 1000 feet AGL, report PZE1
descending to 1000 feet AGL, wilco, S‐AA
S‐AA, over PZE1
S‐AA, switch to Lido airport information, 118,525
118,525, S‐AA
Lido S5‐DAA, overhead PZE1, 1000 feet AGL.
S‐AA, Lido, good day, runway in use 05, report right downwind, traffic is Cessna, turning base
runway 05, will report right downwind, looking out, S‐AA

…
S‐AA, right downwind RWY 05
S‐AA, report final RWY 05
will report final, RWY 05, S‐AA
I‐MISA, vacating left, to the apron.
I‐MISA, good day
S‐AA, RWY 05, wind 110 degrees, 5 knots, land at own discretion, vacate convenient left.
RWY 05, landing at own discretion, wilco, S‐AA.
S‐AA, continue to parking by the windsock, good day.
wilco, S‐AA, good day.

34

3.

RTF A cross‐country flight to Gyor departing from Maribor

Maribor Approach S5‐DMG, on Letalski center, dober dan
S5‐DMG Maribor Approach, dober dan, go ahead
S5‐DMG, request taxi for VFR route to Gyor
S‐MG, QNH 1030, line up runway 14, squawk 7003, report ready for departure
QNH 1030, lining up runway 14, squawk 7003, ready for departure, S‐MG
S‐MG cleared to destination, after departure turn left to ME2, climb to 3500 feet
cleared to destination, after departure left to ME2, climb to 3500 feet, S‐MG
S‐MG correct, runway 14, cleared for take‐off
runway 14, cleared for take‐off, S‐MG
S‐MG airborne at 20, next report ME2
willco, S‐MG
Maribor Approach S‐MG, over ME2 at time 25, maintaining 3500 feet, estimating DIMLO at time 42
S‐MG report 3 minutes before DIMLO
willco, S‐MG

…
Maribor Approach S‐MG, 3 minutes before DIMLO
S‐MG contact Budapest info 125.50
125.50, na svidenje, S‐MG
Adijo

…
Budapest Info S5‐DMG, overhead DIMLO at time 43, maintaining 3500, Jó napot kívánok, request
S5‐DMG Budapest info, servus, go ahead
If possible, I would like to cross Papa air base CTR direct Gyor‐PER via Panonhalma reporting point,
S5‐DMG
S‐MG stay on my frequency, coordinating
roger, S‐MG
S‐MG contact PAPA APP 131.25
131.25, S‐MG, szia
szia
Papa APP S5‐DMG, good afternoon
SM‐G good afternoon, identified, turn 045, maintain 3000 feet
turning 045, maintaining 3000 feet, S‐MG
S‐MG crossing of airfield approved, maintain 3000 feet
crossing approved, maintaining 3000 feet, S‐MG
S‐MG contact Gyor‐per, 129.9, Goodbye
129.9, S‐MG, Goodbye
Gypr‐per S5‐DMG, Jonapot

35

S5‐DMG servus, QNH 1028, proceed via Panonhalma to GYR, report reaching
QNH 1028, willco, S5‐DMG
S5‐DMG, overhead GYR
S5‐DMG report long final runway 12
long final runway 12, S5‐DMG
S5‐DMG, land at own discretion, wind 120 degrees 10 knots
land at own discretion, S5‐DMG
S5‐DMG taxi to apron 1 via A
to apron 1 via A S5‐DMG.

36

Sources:
EGAST and Eurocontrol: A Guide to Phraseology for General Aviation Pilots in Europe. ‐
http://essi.easa.europa.eu/egast/?p=214, 2010
Kukovec, Alenka: Letalska frazeologija, How do you read (me)? ‐ Ljubljana: DIOM, 2010
Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2016/1185 of 20 July 2016 amending
Implementing Regulation (EU) No 923/2012 as regards the update and completion of the
common rules of the air and operational provisions regarding services and procedures in air
navigation (SERA Part C) and repealing Regulation (EC) No 730/2006 (Text with EEA
relevance)
Doc 4444 ‐ PANS‐ATM, Procedures for Navigation Services – Air Traffic Management (16th
Edition), Chapter 12, Phraseologies – Montreal: ICAO, 2016

Ljubljana, October 2017
1st Issue

37

